<root>
<page>129v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f264.item.r=</image>

<div>

<id>p129v_1</id>

<head>Animals dried in the <tl>oven</tl> for <tmp>a long
time</tmp></head>

<ab>

Plant them on a <tl>slab of <m>earth</m></tl>, arranging them with
<tl>points of<m> iron </m>wire</tl>, as if you wanted to mold them, and
<del>they</del> dry them in an <tl>oven</tl>, <ms>after the <m>bread</m>
has been taken out</ms>. And they always remain thus, as much for
<al>snakes</al>, as <al>birds</al>, and other things. But, it is
necessary that they be dried promptly.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<render>tall</render>

Note that one needs to give them their shape &amp; put them in the sand,
as with flowers, &amp; promptly dry them in the <tl>oven</tl>, which is
<ms>hot enough, like when one takes out the <m>bread</m></ms>. And it
should stay there <ms><tmp>a day &amp; a night</tmp></ms>, in order that
it is <del><fr>chau</fr></del> dry, for otherwise it would
<sn>stink</sn>. However, take heed that the <tl>oven</tl> not be too
harsh, but rather <ms>like the heat of the <env>sun in
<tmp>June</tmp></env></ms>, otherwise the animals cook. Once dry, do not
wet them, but clean them with a <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> or clean them
with a <tl>brush</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p129v_2</id>

<head>Animals cast in <m>copper</m></head>

<ab>Try, <del><fr>d</fr></del> having cast them in copper, to burnish
them like <m>gemstone foils</m>, to see if they take color
similarly.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p129v_3</id>

<head>Advice about casting</head>

<ab><del>Ne</del> Be careful to not make your gate very wide, and do not
forget to make in its conduit two or three holes and notches, &amp; as
your gate approaches the <del><fr>ch</fr></del> molded thing, divide it
into three or four parts like <bp>fingers</bp>, which are pointed, &amp;
are not very deep. For the <m>metal</m> runs more gently, without being
hindered by vapors &amp; smoke.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>right-middle</margin>

Always make the entry of your gate near the medal, notched &amp; lumpy,
to draw out the fury of the <m>metal</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p129v_4</id>

<head><al>Spider</al> molded on a leaf</head>

<ab>

The <add>very</add> big ones usually have hairy feet, which are
difficult to mold if you do not lay them flat, or burn them with a
<tl>candle</tl>, or stiffen them &amp; lay them flat, <del>with
some</del> anointing them with <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m>. Kill
them in <m>vinegar</m> &amp; <m><bp>urine</bp></m>, like <al>snakes</al>
<del>&amp;</del>, or in <m>eau-de-vie</m>, and then shape them on a
well-made vine leaf, or other thing. Next, you can give them back their
capricious hair with <del><fr>bourr</fr></del> the <m><tl>sieved</tl>
fine hair of cloth waste</m>, having anointed them <del>with a</del> with
<m><al>fish</al> glue</m>, or similar things. Their true color is of
<m>vinegar</m> &amp; <m>verdet</m>, &amp; then fumigate them in various
places with <m>sulphur</m>. Having made your <del><fr>tourt</fr></del>
<tl><m>clay</m> slab</tl>, place on it your <pa>vine</pa> leaf, and the
dead <al>spider</al> in the middle, &amp; pierce with a <tl>point of
<m>iron or latten wire</m></tl> the middle of the <al>spider</al>â€™s body
&amp; the leaf together. Next, place diagonally <tl>small points of
<m>latten wire</m></tl> around the <pa>vine</pa> leaf to secure it well.
Then fix, with a little melted <m>wax</m> and the <tl>point of a hot
<m>iron wire</m></tl>, the end of the legs, adapting them with the end
of <tl>small pincers</tl>. Do the same thing with the end of the
spiderâ€™s small cornicles. Return<mark>ðŸœŠ</mark></ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<figure>

<id>fig_p129v_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5Sk9tdno1ODBqdms</link>

</figure>

<add>To make the gate for the <al>spider</al> on the leaf, and to
prevent the sand from covering the <al>spider</al> from underneath the
belly, furnish the end of the tail &amp; the bottom of the body with a
little melted <m>wax</m>, &amp; applied with the <tl>hot <m>iron
wire</m></tl>, as you know. In this way, the leaf burning &amp; the
<m>wax</m> having melted, there will remain two little holes in the leaf
which will be the gate of the <al>spider</al>.</add></ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<mark>ðŸœŠ</mark>

The <m>wax</m> once cooled, scrape the excess with the point of a
<tl>pen-knife</tl>, in order that the end of the legs stay neat. Next,
place the <tl>circle of <m>earth</m></tl> around &amp; cast your wet
sand, like for other things. In this manner, you will need to burn the
<pa>vine</pa> leaf in the <tl>mold</tl>, otherwise not. And to cast more
easily, let the animal die fully, in order that, when struggling, it does
not mix up its legs. Having made your first cast, uncover the reverse of
the leaf, and make the second cast.</ab>

</div>
</root>
