<root>
<page>088v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f182.image</image>

<div>
<id>p088v_1</id>
<head><m>Sand from pulverised rock salt</m> and <m>sand from the
<env>mine</env></m> finely ground on <tl><m>marble</m></tl> </head>

<ab>The one and the other, once very finely ground on
<tl><m>marble</m></tl>, after having thoroughly <tl>pestled</tl> them dry &amp; beaten
in the <tl>mortar</tl>, I mixed as much of one as the other, and having
reworked them together on <tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>, &amp; passed them
through a <tl>double sieve</tl> or through the <tl>sleeve of a
shirt</tl> to mix them even better, I put them in <tl><m>paper</m></tl>
&amp; put them on a <tl><m>marble</m></tl> in a <env>cellar</env>. After
one <ms><tmp>night</tmp></ms>, they had been been moistened enough by
themselves without dampened them further, because <m>rock salt</m>, like
all other <m>salts</m>, dissolves <env>in dampness</env>. I molded very
neatly with it, because both were very finely ground. They want to be
<del><fr>f</fr></del> humid enough to release well.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p088v_2</id>
<head>Mineral sand</head>

<ab>It does not matter if the color is white or yellow. Above all it
must be in one piece, &amp; as if taken from a <env>quarry</env> or
<env>rock formation</env>, &amp; the deeper one takes it from, the
better. The signs of its goodness is that it is thus amassed, and that
when removing in the form of <m>rock</m>, it comes out in lumps &amp;
<del><fr>qu</fr></del> pieces which demonstrates its bond, &amp; that it
is not too lean.</ab>

<ab>However, it should <sn>break apart between your
<tl><bp>hands</bp></tl></sn> &amp; have very small
<del><fr>men</fr></del> &amp; delicate grains &amp; of the same nature.
If it is not delicate enough, you can pass &amp; grind it finely, either
through <m>water</m>, or through a <tl>sieve</tl>, <del>&amp; when
it</del> or on the <tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>, &amp; in this way, from
<del><fr>sil</fr></del> leanness they become fat &amp; well bound. You
can mold with it in a <del><fr>sa</fr></del> <tl>frame</tl> or in a
<fr>noyau</fr> without <m>cloth waste</m>, &amp; try it with
<m>lead</m>, for if with this one it does not become porous &amp; casts
neatly, it will also behave well with <m>copper</m>. Some say that the
<m>fat sands</m> do not want the <m>metal</m> to be cast too hot.
<pro>Artisans who work on big works</pro> &amp; to save time, do not
need to grind &amp; seek the curiosities of <m>artificial sands</m>,
benefit from seeking some ready made in <env>nature</env>, which has the
finest grain possible, &amp; for small works, they only pass it only
through a <tl>sieve</tl>. But those who work in small works, finely
grind it &amp; grind it impalpable, because they do not need a lot of
it.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
<m><fr><pa>Orber√© grain</pa></fr></m> makes a tawny powder, very
delicate &amp; very soft, which once mixed could <del>mix</del> mold
very neatly. Try <m><pa>wheat</pa> flour</m> burned over a closed
fire.</ab>

</div>
</root>
