<root>
<page>152r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f309.image</image>

<div>

<id>p152r_1</id>

<head>Molding a <al>rat</al></head>

<ab>The hairs of its whiskers would be difficult to come out of the
cast, you can therefore shave them with fire, like <del><fr>d</fr></del>
the <pn>tyrant of <pl>Syracuse</pl></pn>,<comment>c_152r_01</comment>
&amp; afterwards you can replace them with <del><fr>dâ€™arg</fr></del>
<m>silver</m> nature-like ones. The tail is beautiful molded because it
is made of scaly circles, nearly like the one of a <al>lizard</al>,
&amp; in order that the hair does not hinder good molding, burn it in
the fire of a <tl>little candle</tl>. The rest of the body should be
anointed with <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m>, which will keep the hair rigid
&amp; couched, so that the sand will not raise it by getting entangled
in it, to prevent coming out neatly. The <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m> being
dry, which will be quick, you will be able to pass a <tl>very thin
comb</tl> to divide it, in order that it appears in the cast. On a
<al>small mouse</al>, you can even put some <m>common oil</m> to lower
the hair. And before molding these animals (except <al>snakes</al> &amp;
<al>lizards</al>), let them <del>rest</del> remain dead <tmp>one or two
<ms>days</ms></tmp>, to have them more handleable. For they stay rigid
after their death, &amp; cannot be well fitted to their true shape until
they are a little softened. However, if you mold it quickly after it is
dead, or give it its shape before it stiffens, you will do well.
<del><fr>Au</fr></del> And because the eyes die, <del>you there
some</del> if you do not mold it promptly, you will be able to
substitute, in the eyes, the <m>halves of well-rounded
<pa>peas</pa></m>, stripped of their skin &amp; shell. Some make the
<al>rat</al> <corr>shed</corr>, others anoint it with <m><pa>olive</pa>
oil</m>, which is amiable, for <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m> is thick &amp;
has too much body. This is why one scarcely uses it, only to give some
feature to a <al>fly</al> foot or under a wing to keep them rigid.
Others couch the <corr>hair</corr> with an <m>egg yolk</m>, which is
quickly dry &amp; amiable. Shape it, before <m>oiling</m> it, on the
<tl><m>clay</m> slab</tl>, and raise its head with an <tl><m>iron</m>
point</tl> &amp; secure also the feet with points &amp; the tail. Rub it
with <m>eau-de-vie</m>, once dry from the <m>oil</m>. Then cast your
sand, next uncover it like other animals, &amp; make the second cast.
One ought not to open the <tl>mold</tl> until it is reheated &amp; the
<al>rat</al> burned.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin><mark>+</mark>

The <al>rat</al>, because it is thick, comes out better being hollow, if
it is a <al>big rat</al>. A <al>mouse</al> molds better, because it has
shorter hair. It is not possible to mold well an animal that has
<m>biggish bones</m>, like a <al>bird</al> or <al>rat</al>, without
opening the <tl>mold</tl> to clean it well, for <m>bones</m> do not
calcine at all.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>All feathers &amp; all hair is awkward
to mold in accordance with its nature.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin><m>Butter</m> for anointing hairy animals
is better <del><fr>e</fr></del> than <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m>, because
it is more amiable.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>If the <al>rat</al> is big, it is good
to remove its entrails, or having molded it, to dry it in the
<tl>oven</tl>, because the large amount of moisture that it has comes to
boil in the <tl>mold</tl>, &amp; spoils it &amp; makes lumps.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>Do not put your <tl>mold</tl> <env>in
the cold</env> until it has slowly cooled dry. Otherwise it imbibes the
humidity, which makes it break.</ab></div>
</root>
