<root>
<page>043v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f92.image</image>

<div>

<id>p043v_1</id>

<head><m>Varied and transmuted wine</m></head>

<ab>Grate <m><pa>brazilwood</pa></m> very finely, put it to soak one or
two <ms><tmp>hours</tmp></ms> in <m>clear water</m>, then take this
<m>tinted water</m> &amp; add to it some <m>clear water</m> &amp; you
will make <del><fr>e</fr></del> <m>wine</m> as clear as you like. If you
please, put a <ms>drop</ms> of <m>lemon or orange juice</m> in it &amp;
it will immediately turn white. It can be drunk without danger.

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p043v_2</id>

<head><m>Pearls</m></head>

<ab>It is said that <m>pulverised talc</m> blown into a <tl>lamp</tl>
renders them thus.

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p043v_3</id>

<head><pro>Arquebusier</pro></head>

<ab>For firing your arquebus precisely, it is necessary that the end
of the breech be &amp; come precisely to the edge of the touch-hole,
because in this manner the <m>powder</m>, without blowing, catches &amp;
burns all at once &amp; has more force &amp; does not push back. On the
contrary, if the breech is made hollow, as they commonly are, the
<m>powder</m> catches sooner in this place, makes it push back, &amp;
blows, which a chambered arquebus<comment>c_043v_01</comment> clearly
shows, because it pushes back more than another. And since the barrel is
thicker at the breech than at the muzzle the sights are also uneven, for
that at the breech is higher than that at the muzzle. And then, the
thickness of the barrel gains about one <ms>line</ms> over the caliber,
and over the sight another. It would therefore be necessary to either
make the barrel all of one thickness or to raise the stock <del>on</del> at
the end &amp; towards the muzzle, &amp; sink it in &amp; lower it
towards the breech<comment>c_043v_02</comment>. The weight of the
<m>powder</m> must be the third part of the ball.

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p043v_4</id>

<head>Hail shot of the arquebus</head>

<ab>If you want it to go together, set a
piece<comment>c_043v_03</comment> of <m>felt</m> or <m>leather</m> or
<m>paper</m> on top, according to the distance, &amp; let
the<del><fr>e</fr></del> piece be made with a <tl>form</tl> precisely
cut <del>at</del> according to the caliber of the arquebus.

</ab>

</div>
</root>
