<root>
<page>094r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f193.image</image>

<div>
<id>p094r_1</id>
<head><pro>Furbisher</pro></head>

<ab>The parts of a sword are <add>the <df><corr>tang</corr></df></add>,
the tail of the sword, what comes next is the ricasso, the rest is
<corr>the</corr> <del><fr>c</fr></del>blade. The sides are the edge
&amp; the point. Some blades have a sharp <del><fr>r</fr></del> ridge,
which has one single elevated ridge in the middle &amp; along the whole
length, and are easy to break<comment>c_094r_05</comment>. The other
<df>blades</df> are called of three edges or three slopes, which do have
a rise in the middle, but it is flat as if it were a sharp ridge, but
flattened,<comment>c_094r_06</comment> and <del><fr>s</fr></del> these
ones are the safest. The others <del>are</del> are called fluted, which
are notched in the middle,<comment>c_094r_07</comment> &amp; when it is
along the whole length, they are just as easy to break as those with
sharp ridges &amp; are more troublesome to furbish because the
<fr>fust√©e</fr> cannot get in. But one makes one in particular which is
narrow.</ab>

<ab>Of the guard<comment>c_094r_08</comment> of the sword are the
pommel, the branches of the guard &amp; the
<df><fr>pontet</fr></df>,<comment>c_094r_09</comment> which is this
<m>iron</m> strip which closes off the branch which is at the end of the
ricasso to stop thrusts from sliding into the guard. The
<df>rings</df><comment>c_094r_10</comment> are these two branches in
half-round which start from the eye<comment>c_094r_11</comment> of the
guard up to the branch of the <fr>pontet</fr>. The branch that crosses
the guard is called the <df>body</df>. And this
quillon block,<comment>c_018v_02</comment> by which the sword
tail<comment>c_094r_13</comment> enters and to which all the branches
return &amp; are held, is called the <df>eye of the guard</df>.</ab>

<ab>Then follows the <m>wood</m> of the grip which one <m>glues</m>, or
according to the most competent, with <m>gummed wax</m> which is of
<m>wax</m> &amp; <m>pitch</m>, because <m>resin</m> would be too hard.
They heat it lightly, then rub the <m>wood</m> of the grip with it in
order that the tang or the thread takes hold there. Otherwise, if a
<m>thread</m> were to come loose, it would all <del><fr>d</fr></del>
break immediately. On <tl><m>iron wire</m></tl> or <tl><m><al>dog</al>
skin</m></tl>,<comment>c_094r_14</comment> one also puts <m>glue</m> on
it. The garnishment <del>of</del> which is put on the <m>wood</m>
<del>of</del>, which is of <m>silk</m> or <m>thread</m>, is called the
<df>cord</df>, which is made from two <del>thr</del> or three
<m>threads</m> <del>wisted</del> twined on the <tl>spinning wheel</tl>,
or 4 if the <m>silk</m> is thin. The slightly thicker cord holds better.
The binding, which is also made of <m>silk</m> at both ends of the
handle, are called the
<df>buttons</df>.<comment>c_094r_15</comment></ab>

<ab>Some grips are made of <m>silk</m>, <m><al>dogfish</al>
skin</m>,<comment>c_094r_16</comment> <m>annealed iron wire</m>,
<m>threads of gold &amp; of fine &amp; false silve</m>r &amp; of
<m>velvet</m>. <m>Iron wire</m> has a lower price &amp; is the most
durable. Next is the grip of <m>silk</m>, if one does not have the
convenience of being close to the <env>sea</env> to procure some
<m><al>dog</al> skin</m>,<comment>c_094r_17</comment> which is quite
convenient. <del>To</del> The beautiful <m>skin</m> costs fifty or lx
<ms><cn><fr>sous</fr></cn></ms> &amp; 4 or five <ms>dozen</ms> grips are
made from it. This kind gives a good grip even if the <bp>hand</bp> is
<bp>sweating</bp>. To work it, if it is too hard, one soaks it for one
or two <ms><tmp>hours</tmp></ms> in <m>not quite lukewarm
aquafortis</m>, for if it were too hot, it would cook &amp; spoil the
<m>skin</m>. It is sewn with <m>black thread</m>.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p094r_1</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5YTlFNHRBSVRrOEU</link>
</figure>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
