<root>
<page>121v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f248.item.r=</image>

<div>
<id>p121v_1</id>
<head>For casting in <m>silver</m></head>

<ab>You need to arrange your animals as said, and compose the same sand
<del>two <ms>parts</ms> of</del> out of 4 <ms>parts</ms> of
<m>plaster</m>, of two <ms>parts</ms> <m>reheated brick</m>, &amp; one
<ms>part</ms> <m>alum <add><fr>de plume</fr></add> reheated</m>, and mix
it well. Then, having been prepared thus, and you wishing to mold it,
take the three <ms>parts</ms> of an <tl><ms>earthenware bowl, from which
the <pro>peasants</pro> eat their soup</ms></tl>, of the aforementioned
sand, &amp; add to it <m>pure <fr>alum <add>de plume</add></fr>,
reheated &amp; pulverized</m> in the <tl>mortar</tl>, <ms>as much as you
can grab with 4 <bp>fingers</bp> and the <bp>thumb</bp></ms>, or a
<ms>small double <bp>handful</bp></ms>. Then, mix mix well &amp; wet
with a little <m>sal ammoniac</m> &amp; the rest of the <m>common
water</m> <mark>+</mark> &amp; stir it with your <tl>spatula</tl>, so
that it all becomes like a <m>thick sauce</m> or <m>light
<pa>mustard</pa></m>, &amp; having rubbed, with the
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>, the animal with <m>eau-de-vie</m>, cast &amp;
blow, and beat the <tl>table</tl> to shake the <tl>mold</tl> &amp; do as
with others.

<add>Do not forget to put in it <m><la>crocum</la></m>, for it prevents
the <tl>molds</tl> from cracking, &amp; is appropriate for all
<m>metals</m>.</add></ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>
<m>Alloyed silver is better for casting than the fine one</m>, provided
that it is <fr>doulx</fr>.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>
One needs for the <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> to be well pulverized
and well mixed.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>
<m>Sal ammoniac</m> is a friend of <m>gold</m> &amp; of
<m>silver</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<add>Which needs to be placed before the sand in the <tl>bowl</tl>,
which is put in the <m>water</m>, &amp; not the <m>water</m> in the
sand</add></ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
<m>Latten</m> is the enemy of<m>gold</m> &amp; the friend of
<m>silver</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p121v_2</id>
<head><m>Silver</m> for casting</head>

<ab>It is <m>not fine silver but alloyed</m>, &amp; which does not
become perfectly white on the fire, they put it to whiten after the
fusion to also clean it of the <m>solder</m>. <del>or of the</del> When
you need to attach some <del>leg</del> animal against another or to
repair, it is commonly <m><cn><fr>teston</fr></cn> silver</m>. And, all
<m>alloyed silver</m>, as long as it is <fr>douls</fr>, is good.</ab>

<ab>Before starting to cast <add>in <m>silver</m></add>, one needs to
have <m>earth</m> <del>of which</del> which withstands the fire, like
the <m>sandy earth</m> <del><fr>de qu</fr></del> mixed with <m>cloth
waste which <pro>founders</pro> use to cast their canons</m>, or any
<m>good lute</m> which withstand fire, in order to surround your
<tl>molds</tl> &amp; fortify them, for one needs for them to be red. One
needs to also tie them with <tl><m>iron wire</m></tl>.</ab>

<ab>That before <del>casting sil</del> reheating the <tl>molds</tl>, you
have the mixture one needs to make the <m>silver</m> run.</ab>

<ab>If the <pro>goldsmiths</pro> knew knew the substance to make
<m>silver</m> run in their works, they would buy a lot. Some buy it five
<ms><cn>sols</cn> for a denier</ms>.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
I have used <m>silver from the <pl>capital</pl></m>.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-bottom</margin>
Before <del>binding</del> <m>luting</m> &amp; strengthening your <tl>molds</tl>
for <m>gold</m> &amp; <m>silver</m> with the said <m>earth</m>, one
needs for the cast to be made &amp; the vents, &amp; the <tl>molds</tl>
to have been reheated <del>of</del> very red, to burn the animals,
flowers and plants that are inside, &amp; to clean them well of the
<m>ashes</m>. Once well clean &amp; prepared, <m>lute</m> them &amp; bind them
with <tl><m>iron wire</m></tl>, &amp; reheat them again until they will
be well red.</ab>

</div>
</root>
