<root>
<page>016v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f38.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p016r_1</id>

<ab>which is usually of a height of <del><fr>d</fr></del> three
<fr><ms>pans</ms></fr> <del>&amp; will reheat well the</del>. But first,
it is necessary that you have reheated your <tl>furnace</tl>
<del>with</del> with a little of the <tl>big charcoal</tl>, such that
the bottom is red hot and then you will put there the load of
<tl>charcoal</tl> in the middle of which you will put your <m>iron</m>,
not all at once but ten or fifteen <ms>lb</ms> each time. And when this
will be swallowed <del>&amp;</del> at the bottom of the<tl>furnace</tl>,
always put in as much again. And add three or four <ms>shovels</ms> of
<tl>new charcoal</tl> which should be of the biggest kind and moistened,
in order that it may have more heat &amp; and not be consumed too soon.
And when you see that your <tl>furnace</tl> is full of substance, around
two <ms>quintals</ms>, or less if you don't have that much, you will
leave the <tl>charcoal</tl> to be consumed by itself. And when the
<tl>charcoal</tl> is as it were reduced down to the level of the
<tl>furnace</tl>, you will be able to pour into <tl>molds</tl> &amp;
<tl><m>iron</m> or <m>metal</m> shells</tl>, which is even better
because one <m>iron</m> attaches to the other. And it is necessary that
the inside of the <tl>mold</tl> be well covered with <m>wetted
ashes</m>, in order that it does not adhere to it.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p016v_1</id>
<head>Against Go<exp>norrhea</exp></head><comment>c_016v_01</comment>

<ab>Soak <m><pa>quince</pa> seeds</m> in <m>clear water</m> &amp; of
this <m>viscous water</m> make an injection.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p016v_2</id>
<head>For removing fine hair from the <bp>forehead</bp></head>

<ab>Take a <tl><ms>needleâ€™s worth</ms> of <m>fine silk</m></tl> &amp;
pass it tightly across the places with the hair &amp; they will attach
to the <m>silk</m> like <m>fine cotton wisps</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p016v_3</id>
<head><m>Silk</m></head>

<ab><m>Crimson</m><comment>c_016v_02</comment> is more abundant than all
other <m>silks</m> because its color does not charge as do blue &amp;
green, which also cost cheaper for the <pro>worker</pro>. Black is less
abundant because it charges much.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p016v_4</id>
<head>Keeping <m><pa>oranges</pa></m></head>

<ab>One needs to choose them quite whole, without being rotten, &amp;
put them &amp; fill a <tl>well closed <del>and</del><m>tin</m>
vessel</tl> with them &amp; they will keep six
<ms><tmp>months</tmp></ms></ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p016v_5</id>
<head><tl>Candles</tl></head>

<ab>They keep well in <m>bran</m> which makes them white &amp;
long-lasting, so say some. I believe, however, that it is enough to keep
them in a <env>cool &amp; dry place</env>, in such manner that they are
not crowded. It is better if inside the wick there is a <m><pa>hemp</pa>
thread</m>, which gives it more light &amp; makes the wick hold up
straighter. Otherwise, if it is all of <m>cotton</m>, as those of
<pl>Montauban</pl> make, it is necessary to snuff it out often, for
after it has burnt <del><fr>il</fr></del> a little, the <m>cotton</m>
droops &amp; makes the <tl>candle</tl> drip.</ab>

</div>
</root>
