<root>
<page>142r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f289.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p141r_1</id>

<ab>are not uncovered as much. But because the <al>crayfish</al> is
awkward to burn &amp; clean, one needs to uncover as much as one can,
especially the little legs until the end, for these are awkward &amp; if
they were not to be uncovered and you were to have to pull them, you
could break something in the <tl>mold</tl>. While uncovering with the
<tl>point of a knife</tl>, or even a <tl>burin</tl> or other <tl>clean
thing</tl>, clean very carefully the sand which will be in the joints
&amp; elsewhere with your <tl>little brushes</tl>. And if something gets
detached, attach it with <m>wax</m>, as said. And attach also the horns
in the same way. And make also the gate, along the end of the little
legs, with some <tl>wax</tl>. And fill the holes made by the <tl><m>iron
wire</m> point</tl> with it. And once everything is well neat &amp; more
than half is uncovered, <m>oil</m> your <del><fr>ut</fr></del> <tl>mold</tl>
<del>&amp; <fr>nâ€™oubli</fr></del>, after having dipped the reverse in
<m>water</m> &amp; do not forget to <m>oil</m> all the delicate parts
which are between the legs and the little pincers. Then, rub the
<al>crayfish</al> with <m>eau-de-vie</m>. And make your second cast,
having flattened the first <tl>mold</tl>, in order that the
<tl>clamps</tl> join better. Your <tl>mold</tl> must be wider on the
side that is imprinted, than the back. Do not open your <tl>mold</tl>
after the second cast unless it has been <m>luted</m> &amp; reheated
&amp; that what is inside is burned. Do not forget to put
<m><la>crocum</la></m> among your sand when you mold <al>crayfish</al>,
for one needs to reheat strongly &amp; the <m><la>crocum</la></m>
withstands marvelously. Molding a <al>crab</al> &amp; a
<al>crayfish</al> is all the <add>same</add>. When you have uncovered
your <al>crayfish</al> on one side, delay the least that you can for
making the second cast, for <del><fr>el</fr></del> <al>crayfish</al> dry
<del><fr>se</fr></del> out. It is not just about uncovering the
<al>crayfish</al> well, in such a way that you see an entire half, but
take heed that your <tl>mold</tl> itself, in which you uncover, release
well, for even if the <al>crayfish</al> were well burned, you
<del><fr>despoui</fr></del> would not be able to open your <tl>mold</tl>
without breaking.</ab>

<ab><margin>top</margin><render>wide</render>Repair with
<tl>penknives</tl>, <del><ill/></del> <tl>files</tl>, <tl>little
<fr>chaples</fr></tl>, or <tl>burins</tl> &amp;.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

make all around them, as you see, a gate of <m>wax</m> &amp; at the end
of the tail, also two or three, whence you make you make the principal
gate.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p142r_1</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5Qkh2MDhvUkFnUW8</link>

</figure>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>Make a gate of <m>wax</m>, elongated in
a line, like a <m>thick thread</m>, all along the end of the legs, &amp;
at <del><fr>u</fr></del> the extremity of the tail. If there is also
some piece of leg or other part that is further away from the line of
the others, or raised above, or folded on its own, give it a gate of
<m>wax</m>, which from its extremity, joins either at the body or at one
of the big legs, or at some other place which receives a lot of
<m>metal</m>.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>Having uncovered it, attach &amp; secure
with <m>wax</m> the two little hairy horns of the <al>crayfish</al>
&amp; other things which are not <corr><del><fr>en</fr></del></corr>
<del><fr>despoui</fr></del> secured at all.</ab>

</div>
</root>
