<root>
<page>036v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f78.image</image>

<div>

<id>p036v_1</id>

<head><pro>Founder</pro></head>

<ab>Kitchen pots are made well, in order not to give a <sn>bad taste to
the meat</sn>, with the same <m>metal the bells are made of</m>. It is
true that <pro>foun<del><fr>ables</fr></del><add>ders</add></pro> mix in
more <m>latten</m> to make them yellower, in order to sell them better.
But the <m>latten</m> by itself, &amp;simply by touching it, is
<sn>stinking</sn> &amp; <sn>bad smelling</sn>.</ab>

<ab><m>Latten</m> does not lose, or very slightly, its <m>calamine</m>
in an <tl>air furnace</tl> when it is melted in a <tl>crucible</tl>, nor
does it lose it in a <tl><m>wood</m> furnace</tl>, but it does in a
<tl>bellows furnace</tl> because <tl>bellows</tl> give intense
flames.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p036v_2</id>

<head><tl><fr>Four Ã  vent</fr></tl></head>

<ab>It is necessary that the mouth be narrower than the bottom. And it
is enough if the <tl>crucible</tl> can enter in it, &amp; if there is
enough space to remove &amp; take it with <tl>pincers</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p036v_3</id>

<head><m><pro>Glassworkers</pro>' glass</m></head>

<ab>One says that in <pl>Lorraine</pl> &amp; in <pl>Flanders</pl>
<m>well-made glass</m> is made of <m><pa>fern</pa> ashes</m> &amp;
<m>pebbles</m>, and first they blow up a long bubble, which another
<pro>worker</pro>, with long shears, cleaves &amp; cuts lengthwise.
Then, having set this long, cleft bubble on a <tl><m>stone</m></tl> or
large <tl>platine</tl> that is in the <tl>furnace</tl>, a little less
warm than the <fr>fonte</fr>, it is left to expand. And again in
addition to this, they flatten it with a long &amp; <tl>thick round
<m>iron</m> stick</tl>, then they put it back in the <tl>furnace</tl> to
reheat. It is made in the same way in <pl>England</pl> more beautifully.
Near <pl>Rouen</pl> in <pl>France</pl>, <m>plate glass</m> is made with
some <del>salt of</del> <m><pa>saltworth</pa></m> &amp; <m>pebbles</m>,
that is whiter &amp; more delicate than that of <pl>Lorraine</pl>. For
<m>plate glass</m> can be melted with a <tl>candle</tl> &amp; not that
from <pl>Lorraine</pl>. That of plate is blown in a long still, which
someone else cuts at the tip, then the blower, while turning it &amp;
while touching it to a <tl>plane</tl> that is on the ground,
<del><fr>A</fr></del> flattens it, then puts it to reheat. Thus the
middle where it begins still remains.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

The <m>glass</m> can be remelted with the light of a <tl>candle</tl>
when wet, but not as evenly as with the <tl>hot <m>iron</m></tl>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
