<root>
<page>017r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f39.image</image>

<div>

<id>p017r_1</id>

<head>On the <pro>gunner</pro></head>

<ab>

The cannon fires at point blank from five to six hundred <ms>paces</ms>.
But not for battering, in which it can only perform well from two
hundred <ms>paces</ms>, or three hundred <del><ms>paces</ms></del> at
the most, and it should not be any farther. Its ball usually weighs 40
<ms>lb</ms> of the <ms><pro><pn>King</pn></pro>'s caliber</ms>. There is
a <df>cannon-perrier</df>, which weighs xxv <ms>quintals</ms>, which are
small, short cannons. It is for fighting the <env>ditch casemates</env>
&amp; for battering at close range. It bears a large ball of the
<ms><pro><pn>King</pn></pro>'s caliber</ms> like the others, namely of
40 <ms>lb</ms>. It bears in the breech only the <ms>width of two balls
&amp; a quarter of a ball</ms>. The front only bears the <ms>width of
one ball &amp; a third of a ball</ms>. Its charge is similar to those of
bigger ones, namely xx. And for this reason, when one wants to try them
<del><ill/></del>, one ought not to over-charge it, for this damages the
piece. And for the first time &amp; until it has fired five or six
<del>pieces</del> shots, it is better not to give its complete charge,
for the piece is still proving itself. And the test that one can do is
to give it a charge of xx <ms>lb</ms> of <m>fine arquebus powder</m>
instead of <m>ordinary cannon powder</m>. And four good <al>horses</al>
are sufficient to drag them. They are easy, &amp; close up they have as
much force as the big ones, especially for <env>private houses</env>
&amp; <env>small towns</env> &amp; <env>fortresses of little
importance</env>. They are no more subject to bursting than the others
because they are short. For that which gives great strength to the
<m>powder</m> &amp; in danger of bursting <add>at the piece</add>, is
the length of the piece, because the <m>powder</m> is burned entirely
before exiting, &amp; <del>the</del> its impetuosity is held constrained
for longer in a <del>small</del> long piece than a
<del><fr>gr</fr></del> short one. The cannon-perrier is usually seven to
eight <ms><fr>pans</fr></ms> long. It is true that this is a
<ms><fr>pan</fr> of <pl>Montpellier</pl></ms> &amp; not a
<ms><pro><pn>King</pn></pro>’s pan</ms>, which is not used in the
founding of guns for making them good. For the <ms><fr>pan</fr> of
<pl>Montpellier</pl></ms> being <del>of</del> shorter, the cannons
<del>more</del> proportioned there are shorter also, &amp;compensate in
thickness <del><fr>ce</fr></del> the length that they would have by the
<ms><pro><pn>King</pn></pro>’s <fr>pan</fr></ms>, by which measure they
will be found longer. But also they would be thinner. <del>The
great</del> <del>canno</del> The strength of the cannon-perrier for
making a battery is 4xx <ms>paces</ms>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The <add>great</add> cannon, because of the weight of its ball, carries
a range of only a thousand or xii hundred <ms>paces</ms> without
landing, &amp;bouncing, usually it bounces iii times.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The cannon-perrier does not have a large effect if not close.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

One recognizes the good alloy of a piece by seeing it. For if, with the
greenness which they expel on the surface, they redden, that is to say
that they are composed of a sufficient quantity of
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m>. If not, they are only of <m>metal</m>, which
shows up whitish. If they themselves do not make this demonstration,
scratch &amp; you will see. </ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The good alloy for pieces is of <ms>three parts of
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m> &amp; one of the <m>fine metal from a
<del><fr>la</fr></del> large bell</m></ms>, where there is more
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m> than in the <m>metal of small bells</m>. The
<m>metal</m> usually costs xv <ms><cn>lb</cn></ms> &amp; <m>fine
<fr>rosette</fr></m> xv or xvi.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The <ms><df><fr>pan</fr> of <pl>Montpellier</pl></df></ms> is equivalent
to six of the <ms><df><pro><pn>King</pn></pro>’s inches</df></ms>, which
contains in it two common. </ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<render>wide</render>

It is necessary, for <del>a</del> mounting a piece well, that it be as
high at the side of the mouth as at the breech. Otherwise, one does not
mount well.

</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
