<root>
.<page>098r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f201.image</image>

<div>
<id>p098r_1</id>
<head><m>Varnish</m> for lutes</head>

<ab>They take a little <m>turpentine</m> &amp; <m>oil of turpentine or
of <pa>spike lavender</pa></m> &amp; <m>amber pulverized</m> &amp;
passed very subtly &amp; make as that of <m>mastic</m>, &amp; add in to
color it a little <m><al>dragon</al>'s blood</m> and make it reddish,
and others some <m><fr>terra merita</fr></m> for yellow.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p098r_2</id>
<head>Borders of a <env>garden</env></head>

<ab>One needs to plow the soil, then make it thinner with the
<tl>rake</tl>. And next, if it is dry, one needs to moisten it. Then
stretch the <tl>chalked cord</tl> very close, and hit on the entire
length of the <tl>chalked cord</tl> <del><fr>as</fr></del> with the back
of a <tl>pruning knife</tl>, in order that the <tl>chalked cord</tl>
marks a straight line, the <ms>length</ms> of which you will <del><fr>un
bord</fr></del> make holes with an <tl><m>iron</m> stake</tl>, where you
will plant your <pa>rosemary</pa>. Behead &amp; cut to measure and
<pa>prune</pa> at the foot.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p098r_3</id>
<head><pro>Locksmith</pro></head>

<ab>To well <m>tin</m> nails and other work, they <tl>file</tl> their
work very neatly. Then to clean it well &amp; rid it of fattiness, they
make it boil in <m>vinegar</m>, then they wipe it well with a
<tl><m><pa>linen</pa></m></tl>. Next, they heat it &amp; pass some
<m>resin</m> over top, which coats it with a shiny skin like
<m>varnish</m>. This done, they melt some <m>pure &amp; fine tin</m> in
their <m><df>estamiere</df></m>, which is a little square <m>iron</m>
box. And when the <m>tin</m> is well melted &amp; moderately warm, they
throw in <m>resin</m> in to burn the filth, &amp; then they let the
<tl>head of a nail</tl> or something similar soak a little, &amp; having
remained there for seven or eight <ms><tmp>pauses</tmp></ms>, they take
it out and shake it, hitting the top with an <tl><m>iron</m></tl> to
make the <m>tin</m> that is superfluous fall off, &amp; clean it with a
<tl>small stick wrapped in <m>tow</m></tl>. And if it is not well
<m>tinned</m>, you will hit it hot with a piece of <m>resin</m> &amp; do
as before &amp; let it cool. When the work cools, it becomes yellow,
which is a sign that the <m>tin</m> is the right temperature. But it
becomes blue if the <m>tin</m> is too hot. Things <del><fr>t</fr></del>
thus <m>tinned</m> are durable &amp; are not undone like <m>tinning done
in leaf</m>, thus at the end of a <tmp>year</tmp> they can be clarified
&amp; renewed by heating &amp; rubbing them.</ab>

<ab><pro>Leadsmiths</pro> say that making a <al>lizard</al> die in the
melted <del><fr>il des</fr></del> <m>tin</m> makes the <m>tinning</m>
become very golden. Or else putting in <m>sal ammoniac</m>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
