<root>
<page>105v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f216.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p105r_4</id>

<ab>Next, when it will be well <del><fr>b</fr></del> taken, cut the top
of the tree that exceeds your tree, <del><fr>ne</fr></del> three or 4
<ms><bp>fingers</bp></ms> above the shield for the first time, and
<del><fr>apr</fr></del> then, at the closest point, in order that is
closed. But heed well that when you will make your shield no small hole
remains at the back of the sprout, for this would signify to you that
its root would be broken, &amp; your graft would never take; but make it
so that the back is intact. This type of grafting is practiced
<ms><tmp>from mid-May</tmp></ms>, so that the trees have already budded
&amp; made new output, <ms><tmp>until the beginning of
August</tmp></ms>, and so that the trees are in sap. <pa>Almond
trees</pa>, which are naturally drier, lose their sap earlier, therefore
those who want to graft onto them <pa><fr>mericotons</fr></pa>,
<pa>apricots</pa> &amp; grafts of trees with pitted fruit, which are the
best there, they are grafted <ms><tmp>in the month of
January</tmp></ms>. Generally trees with pitted fruit, like
<pa><fr>mericoton</fr> peaches</pa>, are grafted in clefts. One says
that trees <del><fr>de</fr></del> grafted <fr>en piolet</fr> or by
shield are later to bear fruit than those by cleft.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p105v_1</id>

<head>Gardening</head>

<ab>It would not be very careful to cultivate <oc>armols</oc> in one's
<env>garden</env>, <add>because</add>, when soup &amp;
broth is kept a little bit cold, it creates <al>worms</al> in it.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p105v_2</id>

<head><pro>Fountain maker</pro></head>

<ab>As you will see below in the discussion of the
<pro>mold-maker</pro>, <m>reheated plaster</m> promptly mixed into
<m>water</m>, &amp; and put on the joints of the conduits of fountains,
<del><fr>s</fr></del> resists as much as any <m>stucco</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p105v_3</id>

<head>Catching <al>nightingales</al>

<add>See the 15th folio after
this.<comment>c_105v_04</comment></add></head>

<ab>For trapping them, one needs to observe their nature, the food that
they like the best, &amp; the <tmp>season of their pleasure</tmp>. The
<al>nightingale</al>, as long as it sings, maintains a territory for
itself alone. Therefore approach making as if searching the ground for
something. And taking some <al>worms</al> which come from old meal or
from beneath <fr>mects Ã  petrir</fr> or mills, <corr>which</corr> the
<al>nightingale</al> is fond of, put some on your <tl>hat</tl> attached
with a <tl>pin</tl> or otherwise, in order that it wiggles. And at five
or six <ms>steps</ms> from the hedge where it sings, make a hole in the
ground &amp; put in some <al>worms</al> and your <tl>device of little
crossed sticks</tl>. It will be anxious for you to leave so it can go
see what you have done, and seeing <al>worms</al> it will enter.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-bottom</margin>Some sell <al>nightingales</al> on
trees.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-bottom</margin>The <env>coolness of <tmp>the evening
and the morning</tmp>, near fountains &amp; shaded places</env>, are
more appropriate for taking them.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p105v_4</id>

<head><al>Nightingale</al></head>

<ab>It is necessary that the <m>iron</m> wire of its cage be of the
thickest, in order that, thinking of leaving, it will not be
hurt. Cover, from the moment that it is taken, its cage with
<tl>canvas</tl>. One needs to force feed it the first
<ms><tmp>day</tmp></ms>, <del>giving it</del> taking it out from its
cage into the <bp>hand</bp> &amp; opening its beak, &amp; with a
<tl>small <m>wooden</m> pin</tl>, put it in its throat &amp; make it
swallow. And continue thus until it is no longer opinionated. This is
done for sustaining it, for if it would become thin it would die.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p105v_5</id>

<head><al>Nightingale</al></head>

<ab>It is necessary for him to have a cage made in the <env>barn</env>,
like those for <al>calendras</al>, doubled with <tl>green cloth</tl>,
because he fears the <env>cold</env>. And for making him accustomed to
eating when first he is put in the <tl>cage</tl>, one needs to give him
<m><al>ants</al> with soil</m> at the bottom of the <tl>cage</tl> to
make it accustomed to pecking <del><fr>puys luy</fr></del>, and give him
<m>chopped <al>sheep</al>'s heart</m>, &amp; immediately some
<m>eggs</m>, &amp; <m><al>mealworms</al></m>.</ab></div>
</root>
