<root>
<page>169v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f344.image</image>

<div>

<id>p169v_1</id>

<head>Molding very thin like <pro><fr>bimbalotiers</fr></pro> do</head>

<ab>They mold in <tl><m>paper</m></tl> &amp;
<tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl>, for neither <m>earth</m>, sand, nor
<m>metal</m> would mold as neatly, &amp; would not receive. Or else they
engrave in <tl><m>stone from <pl><fr>Istre</fr></pl></m></tl> the
principal side, &amp; the reverse is of <tl><m>paper</m></tl> or
<tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p169v_2</id>

<head>Reducing a round figure into a hollow one</head>

<ab>You need to firstly mold it with some <m>plaster</m>, as said
before, &amp; in the <m>plaster</m> cast in <m>wax</m>, from which will
come out a relief that you will repair very neatly, and
<del><fr>b</fr></del>model it as you fancy. And then, you will model
this relief of <m>wax</m> again in <m>plaster</m>, or better yet, with
your wet sand <mark>#</mark> like for <fr>noyau</fr>, &amp; in the
latter cast in some <m>lead</m>, &amp; from this you will have a very
neat relief, &amp; if it is not, repair <add>on the <m>ciment</m> or
otherwise</add>, &amp; take heed that it is always of good release. And
this one will always serve you well for making as many hollows as you
please, in this way. Place <add>half of</add> your figure of
<m>lead</m>, <m>oiled</m> &amp; wetted with <m>eau-de-vie</m> according
to the above, in the <tl><m>clay</m> slab</tl>, then mold this half with
some <m>white plaster</m>. Having set <del>next</del> <add>and having
well smoothed &amp; flattened the <m>plaster</m></add>, take your
<m>black wax mixed with sulfur</m>, as is said, because it leaves
nothing in the <tl>mold</tl> &amp; melts quicker. Wet it in <m><bp>warm
urine</bp></m>, &amp; once softened enough, make it into an imprint
on the half of the <m>lead</m> figure, and <del>it</del> you will have a
very neat hollow. Shape next the <m>wax</m> hollow in a square shape, as
you please, with sufficient thickness &amp; smooth it well on all sides,
&amp; <del>thus</del> next, mold this hollowed <m>wax</m>, both
imprinted on one part &amp; flat &amp; smooth on the other, in the same
fashion that you mold flat medals of <m>wax</m> or <del>other</del>
<m>metal</m> in <fr>noyau</fr>. And the <tl>mold</tl> in <fr>noyau</fr>
will render in <m>silver</m> or such <m>metal</m> as pleases you
<del>the <fr>m</fr></del> a similar figure to the <m>wax</m>, that is to
say flat &amp; smooth on one side &amp; hollow on the other. And having
cleaned &amp; put this hollow to be whitened, if it is <m>silver</m>,
you will be able to mix there some works of <m>sugar</m>,</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin><mark>#</mark>

having made a hole in your <tl><m>clay</m> slab</tl> &amp; having
<del><fr>en</fr></del> packed in it half of the <del><ill/></del>
<add>f</add>igure of <m>wax</m>, a little <m>oiled</m>, to pull it out
better.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

<m>Transparent wax</m> is not good, but rather the one which has body,
to make an imprint well.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p169v_3</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5MGtBY2MyYTNKTUE</link>

</figure>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

As you have molded with <m>plaster</m> &amp; <m>wax</m> one half, you
can mold the other the same.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
