<root>
<page>124v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f254.image</image>

<div>

<id>p124v_1</id>

<head><m>Rouge clair</m> @
<add><m>enamel</m><comment>c_124v_02</comment></add></head>

<ab><m>Fine gold</m> is opposed to it, for <del><ill/></del> on it it
remains yellowish. But alloyed <m>gold</m> is more appropriate for it,
such as that of <cn>escu</cn> &amp; <cn>pistolet</cn>. <del>If</del>
<m>Gold</m> <del>f</del> <del>is not put back on the fire</del> with its
own pale color renders the <m>enamel</m> a dead colour.
<del><fr>Ma</fr></del> And for this occasion, once cut, one puts it back
on the fire to give it a reddish color, to make the <m>enamels</m>
beautiful. <add>Otherwise, they are matte.</add></ab>

<ab>There is <m>rouge clair</m> which, once it is used with
<m><fr>arene</fr></m>, loses its beauty.</ab>

<ab>Some can be found that have <m>grains of gold</m> inside, and it is
also the opinion of good <pro>goldsmiths</pro> that the good one is made
with <m>gold</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p124v_2</id>

<head>Casting with <m>gold</m></head>

<ab><tl>Molds</tl> are reheated better &amp; more surely in a closed
fire, such as <del><tl>pot</tl></del> in a <tl>reverberatory
furnace</tl>. So that when <pro>goldsmiths</pro> want to cast some
important piece <del>dâ€™<m>or</m> e</del> that cost a lot to rough out in
<m>wax</m>, they put the <tl>molds</tl> in a <tl>pot</tl> &amp; cover
them, &amp; fill the <tl>pot</tl> with <m>earth</m>, sustaining the fire
that holds them together &amp; tight. Then, they reheat the
<tl>mold</tl>, <m>earth</m> &amp; <tl>pot</tl> together, and when
everything is well red, they cast the <m>gold</m>.<m>Fine gold</m> does
not run well, but <m>alloyed gold</m> does well.</ab>

<ab><m>Gold</m> &amp; <m>silver</m> do not sour, having been, once
entirely red and hot, dipped in <m>water</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<m>Gold</m> is a <ms>quarter heavier than</ms> <m>lead</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

When <m>gold</m> reaches its perfect heat, it is green like an
<m>emerald</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

Take care that where you want to cast the <m>gold</m>, there has been no
fall of <m>lead</m>, <m>tin</m>, or <m>lime</m> thereof in the
<tl><fr>forge</fr></tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p124v_3</id>

<head>A means to make the gate for small female <al>lizards</al></head>

<ab>Because you always have to make the gate by the tail, and that it is
so delicate and thin that the <del>casting will find it hard</del>
<m>metal</m> would run with difficulty, especially when it is curled,
roll <m>wax</m> in little threads of this thickness

<figure>

<id>fig_p124v_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5dWU4UEtpX0hBV0k</link>

</figure>

and apply some with the <tl>hot <m>iron wire</m></tl>, as said, one at
the end of the tail &amp; the others, that are applied in the same way,
from one <del>edge</del> <add>side</add> of the tail to the other, as
you see depicted. But take heed to make sure, that with the <tl>end of
the hot <m>iron wire</m></tl>, the end of the <m>wax</m> barely touches
the animal, for the sand of the second cast will not touch this part.
But make sure that the end of the <m>wax</m> arranges itself only at the
edge of the empty part of the first <tl>mold</tl>. Make also conduits of
<m>wax</m> around the legs &amp; around the contours of the body, which
are a little long &amp; they will serve as feeders for the
molded thing.<cont/></ab>

<ab>

<margin>right-bottom</margin>

<add>Follow here above</add>

<figure>

<id>fig_p124v_3</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5STY2ZEpOSXFVWXc</link>

</figure>

<cont/>

</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<add>When the tail, which is delicate and closer to the gate, comes out
well, the rest will also come out well</add>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

The principal thing is that the ears of the <al>snake</al> come out
well-molded.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

Your gate must be very thin at the entrance of the animal &amp; of the
<ms>thickness of a <tl>knife</tl></ms>.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p124v_1</id>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5aGQ0OTFCTklrQ0k</link>

</figure>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
