<root>
<page>096r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f197.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p094r_1</id>

<ab>

<tl>round plane, also mounted with two handles</tl>, then with a
<tl>small narrow plane</tl>, one hollows &amp; scrapes it <ms>half a
<bp>foot</bp></ms> towards the end of the
<fr>talan</fr><comment>c_096r_02</comment>, and the shorter the better.
Without this scraping, the sword would always cut the scabbard.</ab>

<ab>

The opening of the scabbard is called the mouth &amp; on top is the
shape of the blade<comment>c_096r_03</comment>.</ab>

<ab>

The stop, which is a <m>leather</m> rim set on the edge of the blade
shape is made to stop the hangers.</ab>

<ab>

When the <fr>estelles</fr> are well levelled, one lays the sword on top
&amp; with a <tl><m>black stone</m></tl> one marks the width of the
blade, &amp; the length, &amp; then with a <tl>chisel</tl> one cuts the
excess. And one passes a <tl><pro>joiners</pro>â€™ plane</tl> to even it
well, according to the mark.</ab>

<ab>

Next, one glues the two <fr>estelles</fr> edge to edge <add>and all
around</add> only as far as the shape of the blade extends &amp; not
elsewhere. And this is to make the <m>leather</m> or <m>velvet</m> of
the scabbard hold.</ab>

<ab>

Then one puts the sword into the <fr>estelles</fr>. And precisely thus
they set it in the scabbard which is all sewn, and rub what is
<m>glued</m> along the shape of the blade<comment>c_096r_04</comment>
with <m>tallow</m> to make it run into the scabbard.</ab>

<ab>

The scabbard is made of <m><al>calf</al> or <al>sheep</al> leather</m>,
the <al>calf</al> ones are all in one piece, but not the <al>sheep</al>
ones. But, when the swords are long, one makes them in pieces which are
sewn between <m>leather</m> &amp; <m>flesh</m>, &amp; then they rub the
stitching thoroughly with a piece of <tl><m><pa>boxwood</pa></m></tl> to
cover &amp; even it. From a <m>good <al>calf</al> skin</m>, viii or 9 or
x scabbards can be taken<comment>c_096r_05</comment>. A
<pro>workman</pro> can easily make vi <ms>a <tmp>day</tmp></ms>. If they
are too thick, one thins them a little with a <tl>plane</tl>. If the
<m>skin</m> is hard, one wets it in <m>lightly lukewarm water</m>, and
one does not leave it <corr>there</corr> for long. Next, the same
<pro>worker who made the <m>wood</m>piece</pro> has to adjust the
scabbard to be well made. It is true that for <pro>common people</pro>,
one may well get ones which are ready made, but they are never carried
as well. When the scabbard is made &amp; sewed with <m>black thread</m>,
one rubs it with a piece of <tl><m><pa>boxwood</pa></m></tl> or with a
<tl>cloth</tl>, having daubed it a little in <m>oil</m>. The scabbard of
a good <al>cow</al> is better than any and also costs more, except the
<m>velvet</m> kind. Under the <m>velvet</m> one commonly puts <m>plain
canvas</m> or a <al>sheep</al> scabbard or a <m>parchment</m> cover. But
the best scabbard of all is a <m>waxed</m> scabbard, of either
<m>velvet</m> or <al>calf</al>. It is because one covers the <m>wood</m>
with <m>thin canvas</m>, which one next <m>waxes</m>, then one covers it
in <m>velvet</m> or <al>calf</al>. A <m>waxed</m> scabbard is worth at
least xxx <ms><cn><fr>sols</fr></cn></ms>, a <al>cow</al> one xx
<ms><cn><fr>sols</fr></cn></ms>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<add>From a <m><al>sheep</al> skin</m>, v or vi.</add></ab>

</div>
</root>
