<root>
<page>140v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f286.item.r=</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p139v_1</id>

<ab>

etch on <m>silver</m> &amp; <m>copper</m> with <m>aquafortis</m>. With
this also, one takes the hollow of the relief &amp; then one throws in
this hollow some wet sand, which immediately represents the relief very
neatly. And then, you can cast on this one, the hollow of this one in
<m>copper</m>, <m>gold</m> and <m>silver</m>, and make seals of great
singularity.</ab>

<ab>
<man><margin>left-middle</margin>
Seals</man></ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p140v_1</id>
<head>For casting in <m>sulfur</m></head>

<ab>

To cast neatly in <m>sulfur</m>, arrange the <m>bread pith</m> under the
<tl>brazier</tl>, as you know. Mold in it what you want &amp; let dry
&amp; you will have very neat work.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>

Try <m>sulfur</m> passed through <m>melted wax</m>, because it no longer
inflames &amp; and no longer makes eyelets.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p140v_2</id>
<head>Molding and shrinking a large figure</head>

<ab>

Mold it with <m>bread pith</m>, having come from the <tl>oven</tl>, or
as the above, &amp; in drying out it will shrink &amp; consequently the
medal that you will cast. You <del>it</del> can, by this means, by
elongating and widening the imprinted <m>bread pith</m>, vary the figure
&amp; with one image make many various ones. <m>Bread</m> coming from
the <tl>oven</tl> is better. And the one that is reheated twice retracts
more. You can cast <m>sulphur</m> without leaving the imprint of the
<m>bread</m> to dry, if you want to mold as big as it is. But if you
want to let it shrink, make it dry, either more or less.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p140v_3</id>
<head>Cast of <m>lead</m> and <m>tin</m> in <m>plaster</m></head>

<ab>

If you want to cast some flat medal or some animal that is not very
weighty, and that does not need to burn in the <tl>mold</tl>, you can
cast in <m>plaster</m> &amp; <m>brick</m> mixed like above, and not in
<m>plaster</m> alone, for it contracts too much, feeling a harsh fire if
it does not have a companion. But, with <m>brick</m>, it holds well.
However, take heed to dry out your <tl>mold</tl> at length &amp; on a
slow fire &amp; with patience, for there is no need to reheat it. But
when your work is of <m>flowers</m> or other things that want <del>to
be</del> their <tl>molds</tl> reheated &amp; set ablaze, mix in some
<m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> &amp; even some <m><la>crocum</la></m>. I have
molded in <m>plaster</m> &amp; <m>brick</m> very neatly &amp; it
withstood several castings.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>

<render>tall</render>

<man><margin>left-top</margin>I tried</man> <m>plaster</m> &amp;
<m>brick</m> alone and molded <fr>en noyau</fr> like others. My
<tl>mold</tl> was very neat, having lightly <m>oiled</m> &amp; rubbed
with <m>eau-de-vie</m> my medal. I made my gate ample at the entrance,
narrowing it until the medal, which was very thin. I notched the gate
which embraced well the medal. I dried the <tl>mold</tl> well on a slow
fire &amp; at the end, heated it well without reddening it. I let it
<ms>cool in such a way that <sn>I could hold my <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl>
to it without burning myself</sn></ms>. I made an alloy of 4
<ms>℥</ms> of <m>tin</m>, &amp; six
<ms><fr>deniers</fr></ms> of <m>lead</m>. I cast red, and it came out
well. Next, I put in for 4 <ms>℥</ms> of
<m>tin</m> xii <ms><fr>deniers</fr></ms> of <m>lead</m>, it came out
very well.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>

When there is nothing to burn in the mold, it is not necessary to reheat
it for <m>lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m>. But for flowers &amp; what should
burn, yes.</ab>

</div>
</root>
