<root>
<page>019r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f43.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p017r_1</id>

<ab>

The <fr>faulconneau</fr> is loaded with a <tl>ladle</tl>, and one
commonly gives it only one <tl><ms>ladle</ms></tl>. There are also
other <fr>faulconneaux</fr> weighing three <ms>quintals</ms>, and which
are nine <ms><fr>pans</fr></ms> long. Their ball weighs half a
<ms>lb</ms>. Their charge is a quarter of <m>powder</m>. It is loaded
either with a <tl>ladle</tl>, but more commonly with a charge. At the
breech, 3 <ms>balls</ms>, &amp; 2 in front. To the small pieces which
are under 3 <ms>quintals</ms> one gives them at least 3 <ms>balls</ms>
&amp; a twelfth <ms>part of a ball</ms> at the breech, &amp; sometimes
takes away from the front to make this addition to the breech, according
to the length one gives them.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The strength of the piece is at the level of the trunnion, which is the
point of departure of the lit <m>powder</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The strength of the <fr>berche</fr> is at the
<fr>maslée</fr><comment>c_019r_01</comment>, &amp;at the back of the
breech.

</ab>

<ab>

A double musket weighs 2 <ms>quintal</ms>s, is seven
<fr><ms>pan</ms>s</fr> long, carries a ball of a quarter of a
<ms>lb</ms> or a little less. At the breech 3 <ms>balls</ms>, two in
front. One loads it with as much <m>powder</m> as ball, up to the top of
the escutcheon,<comment>c_018v_02</comment> which in these small pieces can amount to <add>3
or</add> 4 <ms>balls</ms> of <m>arquebus powder</m>. For if one uses
<m>cannon powder</m>, one can load it to a thickness of <del>f</del>
five <ms>balls</ms>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

One needs to understand all of this as <m>iron</m> balls. When one
shoots a <m>metal</m> ball, one over-charges by a quarter
<tl><ms>ladle</ms></tl> because if a cannon ball weighs 40
<ms>lb</ms>, the <m>metal</m> one weighs lx <ms>lb</ms>. One also takes
the gun-sight higher when shooting a <m>metal</m> ball. For if one
shoots an <m>iron</m> ball point-blank, one takes six <ms>lines</ms>
higher when shooting <m>metal</m> balls. A <m>metal</m> ball <del>makes</del>
alloyed with <m>copper</m>, in order that it is not frangible, is more
effective hitting at close range than that of <m>iron</m>. But the
<m>iron</m> one hits more fiercely from afar. </ab>

<ab>

A simple musket weighs one <ms>quintal</ms>, is six
<fr><ms>pan</ms>s</fr> long. <del>carries a ball weighing <ill/>
<fr>qu</fr></del> One has no consideration for those which are under two
<ms>quintal</ms>s, which readily carry <m>lead</m> balls
<del><fr>un</fr></del> of the weight of the ball, but of the caliber.
However, those which can receive balls of <m>metal</m> or <m>iron</m> do
better because they will penetrate more than six <m>lead</m> ones. Its
charge is up to the escutcheon, namely the thickness of 4
<ms>balls</ms>. </ab>

<ab>

Arquebus à croc weighs lx <ms>lb</ms>, that is to say the large one is
five <fr><ms>pan</ms>s</fr> long, its charge is up to the
escutcheon, namely <add>the length of</add> 4 <ms>balls</ms>, it
carries <m>lead</m> balls, and is for the defence of houses. Of these
arquebus à croc, both the large &amp; the small ones, one makes orgues
which are <del>or</del> appropriate for an assault, both outside &amp;
inside the place. They are founded separately as if to serve for uses
other than orgues. See the marked 4th leaf following.

<figure>

<id>fig_p019r_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5WWY3VjdlVktqZVk</link>

<!--Philip Cherian: Continues into p022v-->

</figure>

</ab>

</div>
</root>
