<root>
<page>107r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f219.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p106v_1</id>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

<figure>

<id>fig_p107r_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5RFFFT3hSbnlGaVU</link>

</figure>

as heavy as before, and like a moderately thick paste &amp; that it is
not so easy to handle, as when it is liquid. It is a sign that it is
cooked enough, which you will know when it also throws big bubbles or
exhalations in the middle &amp; around, as long as a
<ms><bp>finger</bp></ms>. Seeing it in this state, remove it from the
fire for it is heated enough, because if you were to reheat more, it
would be too much &amp; would not set as well. For, when it becomes red
&amp; overheats, it loses its strength &amp; spoils the sand. Leave it
to cool before mixing it within the other sands. And when it is cold,
mix and mold, for as soon as you will use it after its cooking, the
sooner it will set.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p107r_1</id>
<head>Catching <al>lizards</al> and <al>snakes</al></head>

<ab>Take a <tl>stick</tl> and attach a <tl>string</tl> at the end, which
has a <del>knot</del> <del><add>eyelet</add></del> slip
<add>eyelet</add> at the end. And, being two to three, to distract the
<al>lizard</al> while whistling, approach the eyelet towards his neck,
and when his head is inside, pull. <add>The <al>lizard</al> is more
tedious to catch by <tl><bp>hand</bp></tl> than the <al>snake</al> &amp;
bites without letting go &amp; grips like <tl>pincers</tl>.</add></ab>

<ab><al>Snakes</al> can be caught by <tl><bp>hand</bp></tl>, provided
that it is covered by a thick <tl><m>woollen</m> cloth</tl>, for the
teeth of the <al>snake</al> stay in the <tl>cloth</tl>, &amp; cannot
pierce like they would with a <m>linen</m>. The dangerous ones are
recognisable by their blue eyes &amp; <del><fr>asses</fr></del> deep
azur <add><fr>azures</fr></add>. They hardly ever bite <env>in
water</env>, which <pro><al>crayfish</al> catchers</pro>
experience.</ab>

<ab>The sand mixture is of two <ms>parts</ms> of <m>plaster pulverized
&amp; reheated</m> as said, &amp; of one <ms>part</ms> of <m>tile</m>,
reddened <del><fr>et p</fr></del> <del><fr>pre</fr></del> <add>in a good
fire</add>, after the first cooking &amp; then finely pulverized, and of
<m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m>, <ms>half</ms> of <m>brick</m>, namely two
full <ms><tl>crucibles</tl></ms> of <m>plaster</m>, one of <m>brick</m>
&amp; a half of <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m>. There can never be too
much <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m>,<del><fr>s</fr></del> for this is
what gives bond to the sand, and because it does not burn, it makes sand
withstand the fire without cracking &amp; bursting. Otherwise, without
it, the sand would not withstand it. This sand, thus composed, is proper
for all <m>metals</m>, but if you want to use it for <m>gold</m>, one
needs more <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> <del>&amp;</del> than the above
mentioned composition, and mix in some <m><la>crocum ferri</la></m>, and
for it is this one that attracts <m>gold</m>.</ab>

<ab>It is necessary that all sand with which you want to cast well,
withstands the fire well, that is to say that it withstands
<del><fr>abon</fr></del> <del><fr>c</fr></del> a great firing without
getting spoiled.</ab>

<ab><m><fr>Alum de plume</fr></m> is awkward to pestle, and it does not
pass through the <tl>sieve</tl>. Thus one needs to grind it finely on
<tl><m>marble</m></tl>. And <m>the one, white, <del><fr>que v</fr></del>
in powder, that <pro>apothecaries</pro> sell</m>, is good.<add> It is
grinds better <del><fr>su</fr></del> in the <tl>mortar</tl> by pestling
&amp;dragging the <tl><fr>pinon</fr></tl>, thus you will render it very
fine.</add></ab>

<ab><m><la>Crocum ferri</la></m> must be set ablaze in a
<tl><pro>glassmaker's</pro> furnace</tl> for four
<ms><tmp>days</tmp></ms>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
