<root>
<page>087r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f179.image</image>

<div>
<cont/>

<id>p086v_1</id>

<ab>In order to mold well, one ought in a big <tl>frame</tl> several
medals together, for when there is a lot of substance, &amp; the
<tl>crucible</tl> is almost full, it heats more, &amp; then, if one
medal does not come out well, the other will be good.</ab>

<ab>It is better to melt in a <tl>bellows furnace</tl> than in a
<tl><fr>four à vent</fr></tl>, because it gives a more vigorous heat. It
is true that <m>latten</m> melts well in the <tl><fr>four à
vent</fr></tl>, because it is easier to melt than <m>copper</m>, being
more brittle.</ab>

<ab><rub>Some of the <pro>founders</pro></rub> have this superstition,
that only <tmp>three days a week</tmp> are good for melting, namely
<tmp>Tuesdays</tmp>, <del><tmp>Wednesdays</tmp></del>
<tmp>Thursdays</tmp>, and <tmp>Saturdays</tmp>. The others, for them,
are unlucky.</ab>

<ab>When you mold, do not knock excessively on the medal, which is in
the sand, because it prevents it from releasing very neatly, &amp;
shakes loose the <tl>mold</tl>.</ab>

<ab>Take heed also that the sand does not surpass the edges of the
<tl>frame</tl>, for it makes the molded medal higher than the cast,
&amp; in this way, <m>metal</m> will never enter the mold. Therefore,
always make sure that the surface of your casted object directly lines
up with the <tl>mold</tl>, and to make this effect, if you wish, put a
lump of <tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl> of whatever thickness you
wish.</ab>

<ab><rub><pro>Founders</pro></rub>, in order to prevent their large cast
works from becoming porous, are careful to reheat their molds well. And
to know if they have been reheated enough, they knock against it with
their <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl>, &amp; if they <sn>ring</sn> like a pot,
then they are.</ab>

<ab><rub>To cast their canons neatly, they</rub> mix their <m>earth</m>
with some <m>fine casting sand</m>, if they can get any.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p087r_1</id>
<head><m>Sand from <pl>Thoulouse</pl></m></head>

<ab>The usual <del><fr>bo</fr></del> good one is <m>the one which is
found in a <env>vineyard</env> near <pl>Puy David</pl></m>, but the one
which is most excellent is <m>the one is from <pl>Le Touch</pl>, near
<pl>Sainct Michel</pl> &amp; towards <pl>Blagnac</pl>, in a
<env>vineyard that is quite high up</env></m>. The latter is thinner,
&amp; a little fatter than the other, &amp; better for small works. It
does not want to be too reheated.</ab>

</div>
</root>
