<root>
<page>161r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f327.item.r=</image>

<div>
<id>p161r_1</id>
<head>Preparation of sand for <tl>frames</tl></head>

<ab>After your sand <del><fr>de noyau dalu</fr></del> of <m><fr>gip</fr>
of <la>lateribus</la><comment>c_161r_01</comment></m> &amp;
<m><la>alum<corr>in</corr>e jameni</la></m> was used in <fr>noyau</fr>,
gather the <m>pieces of molds</m>, break them on a <tl>long table</tl>
with a <tl>large billet</tl> in order to pulverize<del><fr>s</fr></del>
them well, <add>and, better yet, <tl>sieve</tl> it finely</add>. Put
them in some <tl>pots</tl> into the <tl><pro>tiler</pro>â€™s oven</tl> or
<tl>bread oven</tl>, several times, when it is well lit, in order that
they become very red. Once cooled, repestle them, if need be, <add>and
<tl>sieve</tl></add>. Next, put it in a sufficient, neat <tl>dish</tl>,
or <tl><fr>semal</fr></tl> or <tl>vessel</tl>, and wet it with <m>clear
water</m>, and grind it &amp; stir with a <tl>thick stick</tl>, until it
is well wetted &amp; washed &amp; that the <m>filth</m> goes on the
surface of the <m>water</m> &amp; continue to stir it thus, like the
<m><fr>gip mat</fr></m> that one prepares to gild with <m>burnished
gold</m>, five or six <ms><tmp>days</tmp></ms>, until it is not at all
lumpy. <del><mark>#</mark> <la>nota</la></del> And, each time that
you stir it again, leave it to rest &amp; empty the <m>clear water</m>
which will be on top, by tilting, or with a <tl>bowl</tl> or
<tl>sponge</tl>, and put some <m>clear water</m> back in, &amp; thus
wash &amp; stir it until it is well fine &amp; purged of all
<m>filth</m>. <la>Nota</la>, <mark>#</mark>. Next, leave it a little
to drain <add>and dry</add>, and make from it some little balls wetted
in <m>water of sal ammoniac</m>, and once thus <del>d</del> dried
<del>l</del>, put them to reheat at great heat in a <tl>reverberatory
furnace</tl>, where they should be be quite red, <tmp>a good space of
time</tmp>. Once they are reheated in this way, pulverize them &amp; try
to <tl>mold</tl> something in a <tl>frame</tl>, having moistened your
powder with <m>water of sal ammoniac</m>. And reheat &amp; redden the
<tl>frame</tl>, &amp; if your sand retracts, one needs to pulverize
again &amp; wet it in <m>water of sal ammoniac</m>, reduce into little
balls &amp; reheat it &amp; redden &amp; continue so many times that it
does retract from the <tl>frame</tl> when you redden it. The main thing
is that it is well reheated for otherwise the <m>sal ammoniac</m> would
not calcine well &amp; render the sand coarse, &amp; for this reason,
one does not need too much <m>sal ammoniac</m> in it.

</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
<mark>#</mark> <la>Nota</la>, that one needs, <del><ill/></del>
before drying it, to wet it all and <del><fr>le</fr></del> empty the
liquid in another <tl>common vessel</tl>, leaving the <m>litharge</m>,
in order that the <m>stones</m> &amp; <m>earth</m> remain at the bottom
afterwards. One needs to let it rest &amp; empty the <m>water</m> by tilting
&amp; leave it <del>dry</del>.</ab>

<ab>
<man><margin>left-middle</margin>
<la>nota</la></man></ab>

</div>
</root>
