<root>
<page>012r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f29.image</image>

<div>

<id>p012r_1</id>

<head>For molding <m>sulfur</m></head>

<ab><m>Sulfur</m> is made beautiful mixed with <m>soot black</m> or with
<m>pulverized sanguine</m>, which renders it harder and stronger. Having
let it melt well until it becomes liquid, like <m>oil</m>, mix it with
<m>verdigris</m>, and you <del><fr>m</fr></del> will cast in
<m>plaster</m> very neat a <al>lizard</al>, or something else.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

You must not cast that which has not become well cooled &amp; that which
has not lost all its pustules &amp; bubbles, and has not settled down
well &amp; become smooth like <del><ill/></del> <m>water</m>. The
<m>soot black</m> gives it a fine luster &amp; makes it neater. The most
beautiful yellow <m>sulfur</m> must be used, for the greyish &amp;
lively <m>sulfur</m> is not good. Do not cast <env>in wind</env> &amp;
<env>cold</env>, for it would become porous.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p012r_2</id>

<head><m><fr>Chimolee</fr></m></head>

<ab>The <m><def><fr>terre chimolee</fr></def></m>, otherwise known as
<m><pro>fuller</pro>â€™s earth</m>, with which they dress the
<m>cloth</m>, is excellent for molding hollow or in relief; &amp; if you
want to reheat it, it must first be warmed, &amp; reheat it gently on a
low, indirect fire, &amp; little by little, otherwise it would crack.
Put the figure to reheat in a <tl>pot</tl> in an <tl>oven</tl>, or in a
<tl>covered oven</tl>. It is very malleable, clean &amp; fine. <add>You
can make a cavity for animals of <m><fr>chimolee</fr></m> &amp; cast
<m>lead</m> in it.</add></ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The work needs to be dried for 4 or 5 <ms>days</ms> before you reheat
it. When you mold &amp; make a cavity from <m><fr>chimolee</fr></m>, do
not press too hard, but softly, for it would crack.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p012r_3</id>

<head><m>Paper</m></head>

<ab>The whitest &amp; finest is the best. And when the cavity is quite
clean, as of <m>sulfur</m> or <m>baked <fr>chimolee</fr></m>, it is made
very neatly. You can give it one or two layers of <m>white</m> with a
border of <m>gold</m> to imitate <m>alabaster</m>. And after you have
applied the <m>white</m>, you can burnish it with the <tl>tooth</tl>.
But in order for it to be burnished, one needs to mix the <m>lead
white</m> with <m>glair of egg</m> &amp; <m>peelings from the <pa>fig
tree</pa></m>. Or better, varnish your work with <m>white varnish</m>.
In addition when you are molding with <m>paper</m>, as it starts to dry,
burnish from the back with the <tl>tooth</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p012r_4</id>

<head><m>Plaster</m></head>

<ab>That from the <env>mountains</env> is greyer, and <del>the</del> the
one from the region of <pl>Albi</pl> is whiter. It must be cooked with a
closed fire, such as a <tl>reverberatory furnace</tl> or <tl><fr>fours
de barbiers</fr></tl>. And the most freshly cooked is the best. It must
be finely ground on <tl><m>marble</m></tl>. After having prepared your
cavity from <m>sulfur</m> or something else, &amp; <m>oiling</m> it,
&amp; having enclosed it in a <corr>circle</corr>, temper not too
thickly your <m>plaster</m> with <m>water</m>, &amp; separate it well
with your <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl>, and if it makes pustules, throw in
more <m>powder of the said plaster</m> &amp; <del><ill/></del> grind it
with the <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl> until <mark>+</mark></ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<mark>+</mark> it makes no more pustules. Then cast &amp; sprinkle
once again with <m>plaster powder</m> &amp; leave to set well, then
scrape off the powder.</ab>

</div>
</root>
