<root>
<page>086v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f178.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p085v_4</id>

<ab>becomes porous. Most importantly, make that the cast is always
higher than the molded thing, because usually the sand, being reheated,
swells <del>&amp; if the</del> <del><fr>par ce</fr></del> in the middle,
&amp; in this way, the molded thing remaining higher than the cast, the
<m>metal</m> cannot run into it easily or enter at all. Also make sure
that the <tl>mold</tl> &amp; the cast are well reheated. Cast also all
at once &amp; <env>out of the wind</env>. And if your medal is really
thin, put a <tl><m>card</m></tl>, or two or three <ms>thicknesses of
<tl><m>paper</m></tl></ms>, underneath, when you want to mold it. In
this way the <tl>mold</tl> will be lower than the cast. Cast also at the
place where your medal will be <del><fr>plus es</fr></del> the least
thick &amp; where there will be less relief.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p086v_1</id>
<head>Excellent sand for <m>lead</m>, <m>tin</m> and
<m>copper</m></head>

<ab>D</ab>

<ab>Since then, I molded with <m>burned bone</m>, <m>iron dross</m>
&amp; <m>burned felt</m>, very pulverised &amp; ground finely on
<tl><m>marble</m></tl> and well mixed together. I moistened them very
well with <m>beaten glair of egg</m>. And having covered the medal with it,
as in the others, then filled the <tl>frame</tl> with <m>sand from the
<env>mine</env></m>, I knocked moderately. I found it to be of very good
release &amp; molded very neatly. I let it sit all
<ms><tmp>night</tmp></ms> long. The <tmp>next morning</tmp>, I reheated
it little by little, over the course of seven or eight
<ms><tmp>hours</tmp></ms> <rub>(for if possible, no humidity ought to
remain</rub> in the <tl>frame</tl>). I cast twice in <m>copper</m>
alloyed with <m>â˜¾</m>, as old
<m><mark>K</mark></m><comment>c_086v_02</comment>. The substance
came very beautiful, shiny, &amp; <sn>sonorous</sn>, &amp; without a
<fr>chappe</fr>, and my sand was not corrupted at all. Since then, I
have cast with it several casts of <m>soft lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m>,
that came out better &amp; more neatly than any other that I have ever
found.</ab>

<ab>When you mold, make certain lines around your <tl>mold</tl>, in the
<tl>frame</tl>, in order to attract the substance to all sides, in this
way.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p086v_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5dWFuOW9Db1ZjZFk</link>

</figure>

<ab><m><fr>Potin</fr> from <fr>seringue</fr></m> &amp; other
<del><fr>co</fr></del>works, runs even better than <m>fine latten</m>.
But I think that it is better <ms>half</ms> <m>copper</m> &amp;
<ms>half</ms> <m>latten</m>, which have been used &amp; have been in
very thin works, such as skillets &amp; other similar things. I have
this mixture of <ms>half</ms> and <ms>half</ms> come out well.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
