<root>
<page>037r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f79.image</image>

<div>

<id>p037r_1</id>

<head><pro>Founder</pro></head>

<ab>The <m>metal</m> whitens the more it is melted, because the
<m>tin</m> does not go away but rather mixes in more. And, by holding it
a long time in the fire, the <m>filth</m> is eaten away, which makes it
brittle. If you want to chase away the <m>tin</m> from the
<m>copper</m>, after it is quite hot, throw in <m>saltpeter</m> often.
This only &amp; not the fire separates it, &amp; purifies it, &amp; eats
the <m>filth</m> away. The <m>metal</m> is cast very neatly. The
<m>copper</m> is prone to swell, but because it is soft, it can be fixed
with a <tl>hammer</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p037r_2</id>

<head>Medicine for the stomach which heats it and unstops the
liver</head>

<ab> <del>Take</del> Take <m><pa>wormwood</pa> powder</m>, dissolve it
in <m><pa>capilli veneris</pa> syrup</m> or <m>preserves</m>, &amp; make
with it an opiate that you will take <ms><tmp>once a week</tmp></ms> on
a <m>host soaked in wine</m>. Then you will be able to drink a
<ms><bp>finger</bp></ms> of <m>sufficiently tempered wine</m>. This
dissipates the phlegm &amp; the winds which arise from it. You can take
six <m><ms><pa>pepper</pa> grains</ms></m> &amp; grate their rinds such
that they are smooth, &amp; swallow them without chewing. This benefits
the <bp>stomach</bp> without heating the <bp>liver</bp>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p037r_3</id>

<head><m>Foil backings for <del>the <ill/></del> gemstones</m></head>

<ab>Once made, one ought not to keep them in any <tl>case of <m>iron</m>
or <m>metal</m></tl>, for this stains them, but in some box of</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p037r_4</id>

<head>For keeping <tl>candles</tl> from dripping and making them white</head>

<ab>Having made them, put into the <tl>mold</tl> <m>fresh water</m> well
beaten with <m>bran</m>, which should not at all be purged of its
<m>flour</m>, so that the <m>water</m> becomes white. And dip your
<tl>candles</tl> in that, then leave them to dry. And do thus two or three
times.</ab>

</div>
</root>
