<root>
<page>128r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f261.image</image>

<div>

<id>p128r_1</id>

<head>Casting in <m>silver</m> and <m>gold</m></head>

<ab>

Wanting to melt, always put for these two <tl>metals</tl>,
<corr>a</corr> <m>small stone of pulverized borax</m> at the bottom of
the <tl>crucible</tl> &amp; the <m>gold</m> and <m>silver</m> on top.
This makes it so that if the <tl>crucible</tl> renders some steam or
sour smoke, it will not impair these two <tl>metals</tl>. For
<m>gold</m> mainly, this is good.</ab>

<ab>

If you have several <m>molds</m> to cast, do not think of filling them
in one cast, for the <m>metal</m> would be cold. But having cast while
hot &amp; filling one, remelt &amp; cast in the other. </ab>

<ab>When your <tl>mold</tl> starts to redden on the inside, <del>&amp;
that the cast loses its blackness, then put your</del> &amp; that
looking inside <add>the cast</add> you <del>you</del> do not see
<del><fr>plas</fr></del> <add>a single point</add> of blackness,
continue to maintain it in this heat &amp; if needs be, adjust it in
some half lit charcoals with your <tl><fr>molletes</fr></tl>. However,
<del><fr>com</fr></del> put <add>in the <tl>forge</tl></add> your
<tl>crucible</tl> with a little <m>ground borax</m> at the bottom, &amp;
the <m>silver</m> that you want to cast <del>in your
<tl>forge</tl></del> <add>should be on top</add>. Let your
<tl>crucible</tl> reheat between the lit charcoals
<del><fr>jus</fr></del> <del>without blowing</del> until it is red, for
before, one ought not to blow. And when you do blow, push in a long
&amp; continuous movement the <tl>bellows</tl>, giving them a little
shake when pushing &amp; another when pulling towards you. In this way,
the heat becomes stronger. <del><fr>Com</fr></del>
<del><fr>Ne</fr></del>Take heed to raise sometimes your
<tl>crucible</tl> <del>with the</del> with hot <tl>pincers</tl>, because
<del>that</del> <add>if it</add> is placed right in front of the
<tl><fr>tuelle</fr></tl> &amp; the <del><tl>bellow</tl> b</del>
<del><add>wind builds the</add></del> wind of the <tl>bellows</tl> hits
the <tl>crucible</tl>, it will cool your <m>silver</m> rather than
heating it. Make sure that the lit charcoals support it from above the
<tl><fr>tuelle</fr></tl> &amp; take care that it is at a distance of
three <ms>good <bp>fingers</bp></ms> from the wall of the
<tl>forge</tl>. In this way, it heats better. Therefore, when your
<m>silver</m> starts to melt, if you recognize that it is brittle,
seeing cracked &amp; burst lumps, take the <ms>size of a
<pa>hazelnut</pa></ms> of <m>arsenic &amp; <ms>two times as much</ms> of
raw tartar, coarsely pulverized</m>, for in this way, they have more
ability to heat. And throw it sometimes in the <tl>crucible</tl> on the
<m>silver</m>, which clarifies it. But if you have some of that
sublimated crust on a <m>metal</m> substance, which looks like
<fr>grain</fr> of <m>steel</m>, as previously described, take a little
of that, leaving <add><mark>#</mark></add> the others &amp; throw it
on your <m>melted silver</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>right-top</margin>

Some let the <m>silver</m> rest a little outside before casting.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

<m>Gold and silver, melted</m> with the above said things, scarcely
become porous .</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

For <m>gold</m>, one does not need <del>d</del> as much
<del><m>tin</m></del> <m><la>crocum</la></m> as <m><fr>alum de
plume</fr></m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

Small <tl>molds</tl> are reheated quickly, but big &amp; small ones
should dry beforehand in the <tl>furnace</tl>, for the humidity of the
<tl>mold</tl>, by <del><fr>e fo</fr></del> the heat of the
<tl>furnace</tl>, is attracted outside. But the fierce heat of the
charcoals chases it from the exterior through the inside.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

All <m>alloyed silver</m> makes <fr>chape</fr>, and all other
<m>metal</m> as well.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<m>Silver</m> does not want to be uncovered when melted.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<mark>#</mark> <add>Coarsely pulverized</add></ab>

<ab>

<margin>bottom</margin>

A lump of <m>adulterated silver</m> vitrifies in red because of the
<m>arsenic</m> &amp; <m>orpiment</m>.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
