<root>
<page>069r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f143.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p068r_3</id>

<ab>with <ms>half</ms> <m>lead</m> comes out almost better than <m>tin
<del>pure</del></m> <del><add>or</add></del> or <m>pure lead</m>, even
though in any case they come out well. Nevertheless take care not to
cast <m>lead</m> not as hot as <m>tin</m>. In big works it is necessary
to moisten the sands with <m>magistra</m> or <m>glair of egg</m>.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p069r_1</id>
<head><pro>Joiner</pro></head>

<ab>Three things take the longest to make, leaves, hair &amp;
garlands.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p069r_2</id>
<head>Sand</head>

<ab>You should not choose for casting the one that is in any way lean
&amp; arid, such that it does not bind at all, like <m>the one from the
<env>sea</env></m> or <del><fr>desei</fr></del> <m>from <env>sandy
paths</env> dried out by the <env>sun</env></m>. But <add>choose</add>
them <del>or in <fr>t</fr></del> preferably from
<env>quar<del><fr>reries</fr></del>ries</env> or <env>rock caves</env>,
because that one is best, as long as it is very fine. You will know the
vein if, in the greyish <env>rocks</env> or <env>quarries</env>
<del><fr>qu</fr></del> that seem to be made of <m><fr>arene</fr></m>,
you see <tmp><env>after rainy weather</env></tmp>, certain little
amounts like dust attached to the said <env>rocks</env>, or if a little
piece flakes off, easily crushed between your <tl><bp>hands</bp></tl>,
due to humidity. You will also find it in <m>lean soils</m>, which comes
off in <del><fr>lop</fr></del> large lumps like <m>stones of
<fr>tuf</fr></m> <del><fr>et ne</fr></del>, or among <m><fr>terres
<pl>boulv√®nes</pl></fr></m>, which are much better than those from
<m>fat &amp; strong earths</m>. And one ought not to take it from the
surface, for fear that it be mixed with <m>common earth</m>, but three
or 4 <ms><bp>feet</bp></ms> below &amp; the closest to the
<m><fr>tuf</fr></m> or <m>stone</m>. Since it comes out in large lumps
one would say it starts to form itself in stone. But when it is wet, it
comes apart easily. One needs to make sure that when breaking it up it
is well granular, &amp; that when crushing it between the
<tl><bp>fingers</bp></tl>, it renders itself really very fine, <del>like
impalpable</del>, keeping nevertheless its asperity of
<m><fr>arene</fr></m>, without <m>muddying</m> the
<tl><bp>fingers</bp></tl> like <m>clay</m>. It dries up slightly on the
fire, then it is pestled &amp; passed finely through a <tl>double
sieve</tl> or a <tl><m>linen</m> sleeve</tl>, then takes moistures with
<m>wine</m> or <m>magistra</m> &amp; @ / <la>Verte</la></ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
The <pl>Toulouse</pl> <pro>molder</pro> reheats it strongly then grinds
it finely on <tl><m>marble</m></tl> and passes it through a
<tl><m>linen</m></tl> &amp; moistens <del><fr>pass</fr></del> it with
<m>wine</m>. He makes the cast very broad &amp; <del><fr>ne</fr></del>
flat &amp; barely deep. He casts <m>pure latton used for scales</m>
&amp; similar thin things. He casts very hot.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
@ Try <m>calcined vitriol</m>.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
