<root>
<page>010r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f25.image</image>

<div>

<id>p010r_1</id>

<head><m>Counterfeit jasper</m></head>

<ab>Take <m>horn</m> from which one makes lanterns, quite thin, &amp;
underneath make the figure of your <m>jasper</m>, <m>cornalines</m>,
&amp; other <m>stones</m>, which will be a work more appropriate than on
<m>glass</m>, which is too shiny. And the <m>horn</m> presents a lustre
&amp; a fatty polish like <m>jasper</m>.</ab>

<ab>You know, as with scrapings of the said <m>horn</m>, the
<m><pa>roses</pa></m> can be imitated. The <del>horn</del> colors for
this <m>jasper</m> wants to have a base with <m>clear turpentine</m> or
<m><pa>spike lavender</pa> varnish</m>. <add>And colors matte in body
are not so appropriate here, however beautiful they are.</add> <add>One
needs to <m>oil</m> the unpainted reverse with <m><pa>spike
lavender</pa> oil</m>.</add></ab>

<ab><margin>top</margin>

Thin <m>glass</m>, for this effect, is very beautiful.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

<render>tall</render>

You can encrust beds with it &amp; on the joints you can throw the
<m>filings of talc or of pins</m> on the fresh <m>cement</m> of the said
joints. One needs to join them with <m>gum ammoniac</m> mixed in
<m>vinegar</m>. To better counterfeit <m>marbled jasper</m>, apply
<m>wool with thick hairs</m> dyed in diverse colors &amp; intermingled.
After you have laid down all the colors, scrape oblique lines on them,
then lay down <m>gold &amp;silver leaf</m>. If you lay down on the
<m>horn</m> colors of <m>turpentine</m>, give it a base of <m>silver</m>
or of <m>tin leaf</m>. You can also <tl>file</tl> <m>horn</m> &amp; mix
it with <m>strong glue</m>, &amp; lay it down onto the joints of the
piece of <m>horn</m>, then even it with a <tl>plane</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p010r_2</id>

<head><m>Stil de grain yellow</m></head>

<ab>It is made in <pl>Lyon</pl> from the <m>juice of weld</m> &amp;
<m>chalk</m> mixed together or better yet with <m>ceruse</m>, which is
appropriate for <m>distemper</m> and <m>oil</m>. </ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p010r_3</id>

<head><pa>Roses</pa></head>

    <ab>These are counterfeited<comment>c_003r_02</comment> either with the scrapings of
<del><ill/></del> <m>horn used for lanterns</m>, or with scrapings of
<m>parchment</m>, very clear, delicate &amp; dyed, employed as you
know.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p010r_4</id>

<head>Purple color</head>

<ab><pro>Painters</pro> make it beautifully by making the first ground of
<m>common azur</m>, or better yet <m><fr>azur d'esmail</fr></m>, &amp;
next they glaze it with <m>lake</m>, which will be more appropriate for
this if you mix in <m>alum</m>, which gives it a violet tint depending
on the quantity that you mix in.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p010r_5</id>

<head><m>Powder</m> for sand glasses</head>

<ab>It is made very fine &amp; without being subject to rust &amp; by
its weight able to flow; taking i <ms>lb</ms> of <m>lead</m>, melt it
and skim and purify it from its filth, then pour into it four
<ms>â„¥</ms> of <m>finely pulverized common salt</m>, and
take good care that it contains no <m>stones</m> nor <m>earth</m>. And
immediately after you have poured it, mix continuously very well with an
<tl><m>iron</m></tl> until the <m>lead</m> and <m>salt</m> are well
incorporated, and lift it immediately from the fire, stirring
continuously. And if it seems too coarse, grind it on
<tl><m>marble</m></tl> and pass it through a <tl>fine sieve</tl>. Then
wash it so many times that the <m>water</m> <del><fr>sembl</fr></del>
becomes clear, throwing away that little <m>powder</m> which will swim
on it, renewing the <m>water</m> so many times that it stays entirely
uniform.</ab>

</div>
</root>
