<root>
<page>032r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f69.image</image>

<div>

<id>p032r_1</id>

<head>The body of the cuirass</head>

<ab>The high lames of the pauldron of the <fr>brassard</fr> @ are like a
masterpiece of the <pro>masters</pro>, for these pieces it is necessary
that they be very precisely hollowed<comment>c_032r_01</comment> &amp;
adjusted in order that the movement may be free. The bodies of the
cuirass must be very evenly beaten &amp;
driven<comment>c_032r_02</comment> with a <tl>hammer</tl>.</ab>

<ab>Morions from <pl>Milan</pl> are all in one piece &amp; thus better
than those that are of two<comment>c_032r_03</comment>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p032r_2</id>

<head><pro>Painter</pro></head>

<ab>As soon as the colors of panels are well dried, the <pl>Flemish</pl>
varnish them so they do not die any further &amp; remain in that
state.</ab>

<ab>The one who knows to work well in <m>distemper</m> will work well in
<m>oil</m>. But, on the contrary, the one who knows how to work well in
<m>oil</m> will not work in <m>distemper</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p032r_3</id>

<head>For layering <m>gold</m> in distemper</head>

<ab>Common <pro>painters</pro> &amp; <pro>scribes</pro> make
<m>batture</m>, which is <m><pro>joiner</pro>'s glue</m> tempered with
<m>water</m> on the fire, moderately clear, mixed with very little
<m>honey</m>, that is to say a few <ms>drops</ms> to make it stick, and
with it they form letters, or that which they want to <m>gild</m>,
with a <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>, and immediately after layer the
<m>gold</m>, but they never do their work quite neatly, and if there is
a lot of <m>honey</m> it dries only with great difficulty. This layer is
undone <env>in the rain</env>.</ab>

<ab>Others do better, they temper <m>candy sugar</m> in <m>water</m> and
mix it with <m>sanguine</m> that they call
<m><df><fr>cocon</fr></df></m>, thoroughly ground, adding a little
<m>soap</m>. This is done neatly, &amp; renders <m>gold</m> beautiful if
one uses it as the ground.</ab>

</div>
</root>
