<root>
<page>022v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f50.image</image>

<figure>

<id>fig_p022v_1</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5NkNrYkVZTlVnbDQ</link>

</figure>

<div>

<id>p022v_1</id>

<head>Orgues</head>

<ab>Then one mounts them on a medium thick board close to one
<del><fr>g</fr></del> <add><fr>e</fr></add> another &amp; one makes
notches on the board this way <figure><id>fig_p022v_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5RnQ2Ri1PenA1aDA</link></figure>.

&amp; through these notches one passes the hook of the arquebus which
has a hole through which one passes <tl><m>iron</m> pegs</tl> from under
the board. Then, when one wants to aim it, one mounts the middle one
&amp; that on both sides. If you want to make a double row, or triple or
quadruple or more, you need only place a similar row of boards like the
first, one on the other. <del>For the other</del> This kind of orgues
penetrates &amp; <add>is</add> quite stable. For the other ones which
are made of one piece like a solid square have cannons only
<del>three</del> <del>four</del> one <ms><fr>pan</fr></ms> &amp; a half
long. Also, they only serve for making a salvo at an entry or for
defending a door.</ab>

<ab>

A small arquebus Ã  croc weighs 40 <ms>lb</ms>, is four
<ms><fr>pans</fr></ms> long, is loaded <ms>up to the
escutcheon</ms>,<comment>c_018v_02</comment> has three <ms>balls</ms> at the breech &amp; two
in front.</ab>

<ab>

The double cannon is no different from the large ordinary cannon, except
that it carries <del><ill/></del> its ball <del><ill/></del> which has
one <ms>line</ms><comment>c_022v_02</comment> of thickness, or of
diameter, more. The <df><ms>line</ms></df> is a <ms>twelfth part of the
ball of the cannon</ms>. At the breech, it has one <ms>line</ms> of
thickess more than the cannon, &amp; half at the front. Its charge is
six or seven <ms>lb</ms> of <m>powder</m>, more than a cannon, namely by
two big <ms><tl>ladles</tl></ms>. Its ball weighs 56 <ms>lb</ms>. One
needs thirty <al>horses</al> are necessary to draw it. It makes much
more of a fracas at the wall than the cannon. But it is very troublesome
to draw. It is for this reason that one hardly uses it today, and it is
more for moving to some nearby place &amp; battering at close range or
for an entry, than for ordinary business. One calls them
<fr>basilics</fr>, and they are pieces made for pleasure.</ab>

</div>
</root>
