<root>
<page>097r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f199.image</image>

<div>

<id>p097r_1</id>

<head><m>Black varnish</m></head>

<ab>It is said, at the beginning of the book<comment>c_097r_02</comment>
where you can see it, that it is made with <m>galipot</m>.

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p097r_2</id>

<head>Gilding</head><comment>c_097r_03</comment>

<ab>One prepares the guards thoroughly with a very soft <tl>soft
file</tl> such that there is nothing black<comment>c_097r_04</comment>
left on any of the guards, and next heats them,
&amp; passes<comment>c_097r_05</comment> them as is said. But to gild
&amp; gild with <m>silver</m>, they ought not to pass more than a little
beyond blue. Then while the guards are hot, one attaches them to a vice
&amp; with some <tl>tweezers</tl> one layers the <m>gold</m> &amp; one
sets it with <m>bloodstone</m>,which is quite clean &amp; rubbed with
<m><fr>pott√©e</fr></m>. And when the guards are cold, one reheats them,
then one layers the <m>gold</m> as above. And first one gives
<del>of</del> two layers, until the entire guard is well-garnished. And
next one reheats as at the beginning, &amp; one gives the third covering
of <m>gold</m>. Then one burnishes very thoroughly &amp; with great
force with a large <m>bloodstone</m>. <del>And</del> But note that
<add>to</add> burnish well, the guard always needs to be warm. And to
know this, <sn>one smells it &amp; brings it close to the
<bp>nose</bp></sn>. For one ought not to touch it with the
<bp>fingers</bp>, but one <del>holds it on</del> lifts it from on top of
the warm <m>ashes</m> with a small <tl><m>iron</m> rod</tl>, which has
been purposely made to go into the eye of the guard. And when it is
completely well-burnished, one rubs it very well with a <tl><m>white
linen cloth</m></tl>, and the <m>gold</m> needs to be thicker &amp;
stronger than for <pro>painters</pro>. A <ms>quarter pound</ms> is worth
fifty or LX <cn>s<exp>ols</exp></cn>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p097r_3</id>

<head>Gilding with <m>silver</m></head>

<ab>One needs to prepare the guards &amp; whiten them with a
<del><fr>lince </fr></del> <tl>file</tl>, a little coarser
<del>for</del> than for <m>gold</m>. And one makes them pass beyond
grey, as for gilding. And when they are hot, one needs to double the
<m>silver foil</m>, then separate it with a <tl>knife</tl>, next apply
it to the guard, with <del><fr>a small</fr></del> <tl>tweezers</tl>
&amp; a small <tl>burnisher</tl>. And then reheat &amp; apply until they
are all gilt with <m>silver</m>. Next, one needs to cover them for the
third time, with the doubled foil as has been said, then burnish them
very well &amp; with force, not with the <m>bloodstone</m>, but with a
strong <tl>burnisher</tl>. Just as the <tl>burnisher</tl> ought not to
burnish <m>gold</m>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
