<root>
<page>012v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f30.image</image>

<div>

<id>p012v_1</id>

<head>Molding <m>stucco</m> promptly</head>

<ab>Grind &amp; pulverize finely <m>brick</m> or <m><pl>Armenian</pl>
bole</m> or <m>sanguine</m> &amp; incorporate it with melted <m>wax</m>,
&amp; thus melted, cast like the others on a <tl>relief medal</tl>,
&amp; thus you will have a cavity where you will be able to cast with
<m>plaster</m>, <m><tl>pestled</tl> paper</m> or <m>terre chimolee</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

Finely sieved <m>brick</m> is better, because the <m>bole</m> is too
fat</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p012v_2</id>

<head>Cleaning <m>yellow pearls</m></head>

<ab>Gently boil them in the <tl><pro>goldsmiths'</pro> <fr>bouteure</fr></tl><comment>c_104r_01</comment> then, with <m>tripoli</m> &amp; a piece of
<m>leather</m>, sprinkled on the flesh side with the <m>powder of the
said tripoli</m>, rub &amp; polish the <m>pearl</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p012v_3</id>

<head>For whitening <m>enilanroc</m></head>

<ab>Some think that the crust of <m>ceruse</m> color which is natural on
top, others say that it is a secret of <pro>ancient lapidaries</pro>
that is lost, others say that it is <m>reheated enamel</m>. And by means
of the said crust, multiple ciphers, letters, circles
<del><fr>st</fr></del> &amp; other bizarre things can be formed. As for
the method, I have practiced thus. Once I wished to give it a layer of
<m>arsenic</m> ground on <tl><m>marble</m></tl>. However, I experimented
without this, and I put the above said thing, <m>enilanroc</m>, in a
small <tl><m>iron</m> casket</tl> on the fire of my
<tl><pro>goldsmith</pro>'s forge</tl> with three or four small
half-burnt <m>coals</m>, and blew only with my <bp>mouth</bp>. And,
however, the thing came to <del>redden &amp;</del> ignite &amp; became
all white, not only on its surface but also inside, &amp; at that time I
let it cool on its own <env>near the fire</env>, for otherwise, exposing
it suddenly to cold air, it would have burst. Once all white, I passed
it through my <tl><add><m>lead</m></add> wheel</tl> <del>of
<m>tin</m></del>, where I found it as hard as before, &amp; uncovering a
little white, I found it a fair carnation. Finally, I polished it &amp;
saw that it took a very beautiful polish &amp; could be compared to a
very beautiful <m>agate</m> for cutting some beautiful face on it &amp;
bringing it on <del>the</del> a table of

</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
