<root>
<page>083v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f172.item</image>

<div>
<id>p083v_1</id>
<head>A way for molding excellently with <m>water</m></head>

<ab>

Dissolve in <env>damp place</env> some <m>tallow of glass</m>, and then
place this <m>water</m> on what you want to mold, having encircled it,
and place it to coagulate on the hot <m>ashes</m>. Do the same with
<m>vitriol</m> &amp; <m>copperas</m>, which, once well calcined, reduce
in <m>water</m>.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p083v_2</id>
<head>

Molding in relief on one part and hollow on the other.</head>

<ab>

It is necessary to cast two pieces of <m>copper</m>, <m>latten</m> or
similar <m>metal</m>, very neatly, and then when you have molded the
cavity in the sand, leave the figure of <m>metal</m> that
<corr>you</corr> have molded in the <tl>frame</tl>, without moving it
from its place. And cast, &amp; if there is not enough thickness press a
little &amp; push the figure down in the <tl>frame</tl>.</ab>

<ab>

It is good to mold always the faces not on the side of the cast, but
with the head on the bottom, because the force of the substance is at
the entry of the medal, &amp; there, where the force is, the
<m>filth</m> &amp; <m>grime</m> accumulate. And, in this way, if you
were mold the face towards the cast, some <m>grime</m> could be found
there, &amp; it is better that is found on the clothing, which is easier
to repair.</ab>

<ab>

<m>Vinegar</m> is better for moistening than <m>wine</m>. It is
necessary that the <tl>frame</tl> be quite smooth and even, otherwise
<del>and that the cast be</del>, as you press on one side, the other one
lifts.</ab>

<ab>

This is why the <tl>press</tl> is better, for it tightens evenly, &amp;
more than your <tl><bp>hands</bp></tl>, and makes

the <m>coarse sand</m>, which is damp, communicate its humidity to the
<m>soft &amp; fine sand</m>, which is sprinkled &amp; <fr>ponc√©</fr> dry
on the medal.</ab>

<ab>

When you mold, always leave your medal in <del>one of</del>
<add>the</add> <tl>frames</tl>, <del>is</del> <add>without stirring
it</add> because, if your cavity is not molded very neatly, you can put
it back in the right place by means of <tl>pegs</tl>, which will prevent
it from shifting. But, at first, <fr>ponce</fr> yout medal with very
fine <m><pa>willow</pa> charcoal</m>, &amp; <del><fr>se</fr></del> next
clean it, for this degreases it, &amp; makes it easier to release afterwards.</ab>

<ab>Do not knock it when molding because this will shake loose the
<tl>frame</tl> &amp; the sand.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p083v_3</id>
<margin>left-middle</margin><head><tl>Bellows</tl></head>

<ab>To melt with <tl>bellows</tl>, &amp; hasten your <fr>fonte</fr>,
&amp; also cast hotter <del><fr>po</fr></del>, do not place your
<tl>bellows</tl> at the bottom near the foot of the <tl>furnace</tl>,
for fear that some <m>charcoal </m>might <del>you</del> enters it, put
them almost under the <tl><fr>grille</fr></tl>. It is good that your
<tl>bellow furnace</tl> be in an <env>aerated place</env> so that the
<env>wind</env> might make it heat better, &amp; that it be well dry
&amp; and reheat. One ought to plug the doors of the <tl>furnace</tl>
&amp; that there is only entry of the <fr>tuelle</fr> of the
<tl>bellows</tl>. And by the end, one ought to give it a good stoking,
since at the beginning you will blow gently.</ab>

</div>
</root>
