<root>
<page>087v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f180.image</image>

<div>
<id>p087v_1</id>
<head>Sand, <m>slate</m>, and <m>burned earth</m></head>

<ab>Very burnt sand loses its bond. <m>Slate</m> is reheated &amp; molds
neatly. Next, it is true that it often becomes porous, like <m>burned
earth</m> also does, like <m>fat sand</m> also does.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-top</margin>
I find that one ought not to knock on very finely ground sands, for it
shakes them loose, &amp; <del>make</del> prevents them from releasing
neatly. But one ought to press hard and moisten them sufficiently.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p087v_2</id>
<head><m>Magistra</m></head>

<ab><pro>Founders</pro> take the <m>roots of a young <pa>elm</pa></m>
when it has sap, &amp; boil it in <m>wine</m>, or better yet
<m>vinegar</m>, and keep it <tmp>all year long</tmp> in a
<tl>cask</tl>.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p087v_3</id>
<head><m>Sand from the <env>mine</env> of <pl>Thoulouse</pl></m></head>

<ab> Casting sand coming from the <env>mine</env>, once passed through a
<tl>double sieve</tl>, next put in with <m>melted resin</m>, burns &amp;
inflames &amp; becomes all red &amp; inflamed like <m>iron</m>. Once
cold it is completely black and can be ground very finely on
<tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>. Thus having prepared it &amp; rendered it
without asperity on the <tl><bp>fingernail</bp></tl>, I moistened it
with <m>beaten glair of egg</m> &amp; beat it well, until it was not pasty
but rather powdery. I found it of very good release, &amp; molded with
it in <m>lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m> very neatly, but it wants to be well
reheated &amp; at ease.</ab>

<ab>Others beat it well in a <tl>mortar</tl>, in small amounts at a
time, &amp; thus it is pressed together and rendered very fine. Then
they reheat it moderately, only to dry it. Next, they grind it dry on
<tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>. And thus it becomes as if impalpable, and not
too dried out, <del>it</del> and it retains body &amp; bond of the
<m>earth</m> to which it is related, and is better than when it is so
burnt. Once moistened with <m>glair of egg passed through a
<tl>sponge</tl></m>, it releases <del>very neatly <fr>M</fr></del> very
neatly in low relief, but not for figures in high relief. Therefore,
since then I have experimented <del><fr>lexper</fr></del> with
moistening it only with quite strong <m>vinegar</m>. It released a
figure which I could not release previously. And I believe that,
moistening the finest in a fashion as if with <m>glair</m> &amp; the
coarsest, for filling, with gushes of <m>salt water</m> or
<m>wine</m>, that they do not ally so well. Since they are of the same
nature &amp; are moistened the same, they embrace each other, &amp; hold
together one with the other.</ab>

<ab>
<rub>To mold well</rub>, after having prepared your sands, mold <tmp>in
a day</tmp>. Slowly reheat them <tmp>the next day</tmp>, then cast them
on another.

</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
One ought to choose the one which is usually <del>as</del> in clods
&amp; lumps, well <env>deep in the earth</env>, for usually the one that
is found <env>above</env> has too much <m>earth</m>, and the deep one is
similar to <m>rock</m>.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
I have molded with it in <m>pure lead</m> very <del>neatly</del> hot,
&amp; I had as an example the first very neat one, but the
<m>vinegar</m> hardly gives it any bond, &amp; thus it withstood only
one cast. </ab>

</div>
</root>
