<root>
<page>085v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f176.image</image>

<div>
<id>p085v_1</id>
<head><pro>Founder</pro></head>

<ab>They mix <m>beaten glair of egg</m> with <m>earth with which they make
the first layer of the <fr>chappe</fr> of pieces, &amp; bells, &amp; all
other pieces</m>, saying that the said <m>glair</m> makes it come out
<del><fr>d</fr></del> neatly, &amp; makes it settle, &amp; seats the
substance. In the <fr>noyau</fr> for a small work, <m>glair</m> is also
good.</ab>

<ab><m><fr>Rosette</fr></m>, to come out neatly, wants the <tl>mold</tl>
to be a little hot &amp; <m>lead</m>, which was also mixed with the
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m>, similarly for small pieces.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p085v_2</id>
<head><tl>Mortars</tl></head>

<ab>It is necessary that they be of the finest substance possible, such
as <m>copper for cauldrons</m>, which is better than
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m>, in order that it withstands the blow better.</ab>

<ab>Also the <tl>mortars</tl> for pestling are stronger &amp; less in
danger of breaking if they are of <m>fine copper</m>. And for a
<env>private home</env>, they do not <sn>ring</sn> so much &amp; do not
carry as much <sn>noise</sn> as those of
<m>metal</m><comment>c_085v_04</comment>. It is true that those that are
of <m>metal</m> have more of a <sn>ring</sn> for the
<pro>apothecaries</pro>.</ab>

<ab>Grenades must be of <m>fine metal</m></ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p085v_3</id>
<head><m>Sand from a <env>mine</env></m></head>

<ab>It wants to be well reheated for <m>great metals</m>. Some burn it
in the <tl>furnace</tl> until it is very black, and grind it finely on
<tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>. Others burn it with <m>asphaltum</m>, @but
when it is too burned, it does not mold so neatly, because it does not
have body, and is too lean. You can give some with <m>tripoly</m> or
<m>burned felt</m>.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p085v_4</id>
<head>Sand experiments</head>

<ab>I have experimented with <m>sand from
<pl>Th<exp>oulous</exp>e</pl></m>, &amp; after reheating it well
twice, in a <tl>skillet</tl>, I passed it through a <tl>fine sieve</tl>,
like <tl>the <pro>apothecaries</pro>â€™ double</tl>, without finely
grinding it further on the <tl><m>porphyry</m></tl>, as I have done
previously. I moistened it with <m>wine boiled with <pa>elm</pa>
root</m>, and molded with it a large piece of a portrait of
<pn>Jesus</pn>. I found it easy to release, without having it to knock
on it <del><fr>Jen</fr></del> &amp; molded neatly with one side in
relief, &amp; on the other in cavity, &amp; of the <ms>thickness of a
coin of forty <cn><fr>sols</fr></cn></ms>. I cast very hot</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin><mark>X</mark>

</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

<m>Sand from a mine</m>, well chosen &amp; well reheated, is the most
excellent of all, without looking for any other mixtures, because it
receives all <m>metals</m>. It does not want to be used hot, because it
makes things porous. The most finely ground for big works is not the
best, because it does have enough body to withstand</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
