<root>
<page>064r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f133.image</image>

<div>

<id>p064r_1</id>

<head>Working neatly</head>

<ab>Never put down, if you can, two colors one on top of the other. But
after having made your design carefully, keep the space of shadows for
these alone, &amp; also individually that of lights &amp; highlights,
without layering one color all across &amp; then highlighting or shading
on it. And in this way, you further your work, economize your colours
&amp; work neatly. Which is the reason that, the colors not being
muddled nor mixed together, they do not die &amp; you soften the colors
better, since they are not so thick.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_2</id>

<head><m>Fatty oil</m></head>

<ab>It is not good for working with colors because it makes them thick,
&amp; as difficult to work as <m>azur dâ€™esmail</m>. Therefore use the
<m>clearest <pa>walnut</pa> oil</m> that you can, &amp; the
freshest.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_3</id>

<head><m>Vermilion</m></head>

<ab>One ought not to keep it in <m>water</m> when <del>soaked</del>
<add>ground</add> with <m>oil</m> for it loses its color. It is better
to choose whitish <m>vermilion</m> than dark &amp; blackish. For
<m>vermilion</m> is usually mixed with a little <m>lake</m>, without
which it would hardly be different from <m>minium</m>. But the pale kind
one casts more vivacity than the dark one. It is not desiccative, &amp;
for this reason one mixes in <m>calcined <fr>cristallin</fr></m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_4</id>

<head><m>Oil</m> colors in <m>water</m></head>

<ab>Usually, after grinding them one puts <corr>a</corr>
<del><fr>fo</fr></del> piece of <m>tin leaf</m> on top, &amp; one puts
them in <m>water</m> to prevent them from drying out. But this is more
appropriate for <m>ceruse</m>, <m>lead white</m>, <m>minium</m> &amp;
<m>massicot</m> than for the others, for <m>lake</m> dies there &amp;
loses its color, as does <m>azure vermilion</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_5</id>

<head>Double layer</head>

<ab><m>Ver<add>digris</add></m> does not die, &amp; thus does not need
to be layered twice. But <m>lake</m> &amp; others, &amp; especially
flesh color, <del>the</del> require two layers. Colors hardly change
when they are dry.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_6</id>

<margin>left-top</margin>

<head><m>Yellow ochre</m></head>

<ab>

One needs a little of it in every flesh color.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_7</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<head>Softening</head>

<ab>

One softens in the same way on <m>oiled paper</m> as on <m>wood</m>. But
it is easier to soften on <m>canvas</m>, because the softening must be
rougher on it.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p064r_8</id>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<head>Eye</head>

<ab>

Every eye must follow the circle of the <tl>compass</tl> &amp; not be
flat &amp; square.</ab>

</div>
</root>
