<root>
<page>014r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f33.image</image>

<div>

<id>p014r_1</id>

<head>For<comment>c_014r_01</comment> <env>walls</env> of <m>earth</m>
and rustic construction</head>

<ab><al>Swallows</al> have taught us this craft, making their nests out
of <m>mud</m> mixed with <m>wisps</m> &amp; <m>stalks of hay or
straw</m> to make it bond. Therefore, in places where <m>stone</m> &amp;
<m>brick</m> are lacking, one can use <m>earth</m> to make partitions
&amp; <env>walls</env>. And for this, <m>light earth</m>, which does not
form clumps when plowed, but which is as if intermixed with
<m><fr>arene</fr></m>, holds first rank, because it can be beaten &amp;
tamped down better. It is true that it needs to be moistened &amp;
<del><fr>la</fr></del> cut into clods with a <tl>ditch-spade</tl>, and
thus place &amp; arrange it. This one lasts longer and does not require
as much effort, and <del><fr>ne</fr></del> dryness does not make it
crack &amp; split. But, because such kinds of <m>earth</m> are not found
everywhere, those who are on <env>good &amp; fertile land</env>, after
marking out with a <tl>measuring line</tl> the width &amp; length of
their foundations, drive <del>into the ground</del> in along the
foundation edges, on this side &amp; that, <tl>long poles</tl>
<del>&amp;</del> or <tl>chevron beams</tl> to support <tl>boards</tl>
between which <corr>they</corr> throw the <m>earth</m>, making each
layer one <ms><bp>foot</bp></ms> thick or thereabouts, intermixing it
with <mark>S.S.S</mark>-like <m>branches of <pa>heather</pa></m> or
similar things, then with <tl>beaters</tl> of <corr>three</corr>
different forms they tamp it &amp; beat it. One is called the
<tl>mallet</tl>, which has a triangular form like A, and with this, one
first tamps the <m>earth</m>. Next one uses the one made of <m>blocks of
wood</m>pointed at the tip &amp; helved to a large stick, &amp; this one
is for pressing the <m>earth</m> well at the extremities and edges of
the <env>wall</env>, which adhere to the <tl>boards</tl>, &amp; is
called.<comment>c_014r_02</comment> The other one is called the
<tl>bat</tl>, which is for flattening &amp; beating the <m>earth</m> for
the last time, as shown in .C. Then one makes another layer of
<m>earth</m> <add>&amp; <m><pa>heather</pa></m></add> and beats it as
was said, &amp; continues thus until the <env>wall</env> is complete,
which one covers with <m><pa>heather</pa></m> &amp; then with
<m>earth</m>. Some <del><fr>m</fr></del> intermix the said
<env>wall</env> with rows of <m>bricks</m>. They also make the
<env>wall</env> tapering, giving <del><fr>a</fr></del> width to the
foundations according to how high one wants to raise the
<env>wall</env>. Which, when old, whitens, &amp; thereby shows that it
has <m>saltpeter</m> in it. That is why, when they fall down,
<pro>gunpowder makers</pro> profit from them.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p014r_1</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5b2lVN19SU1Z6UkU</link>

<!--A-->

<!--Nicolas Misery:text refers also to a "C" part of the figure, which
is absent in the actual figure.-->

</figure>

</div>
</root>
