<root>
<page>072v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f150.image</image>

<div>

<id>p072v_1</id>

<head>Casting</head>

<ab><m>Lead</m>, which is mortified &amp; weighty, wants to be cast hot,
more so than <m>tin</m>. And when it is not hot enough, it makes lines
in the medal. <del>It</del> <m>Straw</m> burns in it, provided it is
hot. One can make a <m>solder</m> so soft &amp; runny that it can be
melted in a <tl><m>tin</m> dish</tl>. It is composed of one
<ms>part</ms> <m>looking glass tin</m>, one <ms>part</ms> <m>soft
tin</m>, &amp; another <ms>part</ms> <m>lead</m>. It runs very neatly
and is cast in leaves, but the work is very brittle &amp; breakable. The best <m>solder</m> is the common one for casting well, but
<del>is</del> leaves certain lumpy points. Alloy <m>lead</m> with
<m>tin</m> so that the ingot that you will cast comes out even &amp;
shiny &amp; polished, &amp; without any eyes or bubbles except for a
small point in the middle. And this sign will tell you that there is
enough <m>tin</m>, otherwise the <m>lead</m> dominates too much. Sand is
good for <m>lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m>. The good one is very thin &amp;
fine &amp; lean, which however sticks together between oneâ€™s
<tl><bp>fingers</bp></tl>. The sand wants to be reheated before putting
it to use. And <del>once</del> to mold <add>with it</add>, it wants to
be very moistened &amp; then reheated, not all at once nor with a burst
of fire, for this corrupts &amp; makes it shrink &amp; crumble as well.
But if you reheat it gently, it renders itself very stiff, once well
moistened. One ought to pass it through a <tl>shirt
<add>sleeve</add></tl> for the finest one, in order to first put some on
the piece to mold.</ab>

<ab>One makes a <m>solder</m> with <m>quicksilver</m>
<del>but</del>which is white, but it is brittle. Make your <tl>frame</tl> so that it joins well &amp; that one does not see the daylight
between the joints.</ab>

<ab>The <pl>Germans</pl> cast their <m>leads</m> very thinly, rather
than very thickly, because it seems they come out better, but so that
are not too pliant, being so thin, they mix a little <m>tin</m> with the
said <m>lead</m>, which otherwise would fold up like <m>wax</m>.</ab>

<ab>The blackest <m>lead</m>, so say some, is the best &amp; the softest
&amp; which runs the best. <sn>You will know its goodness by rubbing it
with your <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl>, which will render it very black
quickly</sn>. </ab>

<ab>The alloy good for running <m>lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m> is per one
<ms>lb</ms> of <m>lead</m>, one <ms>lb</ms> &amp; a half of <m>tin</m>
<del><fr>aultr</fr></del>, such that the tin exceeds more than one
<ms>part</ms>. It is <m>solder</m> which flows well &amp; is good
for casting, but it is brittle.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>right-top</margin>

To make the <m>lead</m> flow well, one puts in a little
<m>quicksilver</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

Rub <m><al>cuttlefish</al> bone</m> on a <tl>well smooth table</tl> to
flatten it &amp; one against the other &amp; cross the two <m>bones</m>
with <tl>pegs</tl> to mark the place.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

<tl><m><al>Cuttlefish</al> bone</m></tl> molds <m>lead</m> better than
anything else. But try it to see if it needs reheating. <del>One ought
to mold on the back of the <m>bones</m> &amp; from this side for the
<m>marrow</m> is more delicate there.</del></ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The <m>bone marrow</m> towards the tail is more delicate &amp; does have
not as many stripes &amp; molds more cleanly. The <m>shell</m> which
holds the <m>marrow</m>, once calcined, is good for making sand.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

When you cast <m>lead</m>, you need to cast it <del>cast very
neatly</del> <add>rather</add> hot, &amp; not at once &amp; shake the
<tl>frame</tl> a little &amp; cast two or three times. However, if it
is cast too hot, it will rise up &amp; swell. When it is very hot, it
becomes blue, let it then pass this color <del><fr>deva</fr></del> &amp;
rest a little before casting.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

Some, such as <pro>printers</pro>, mix <m>iron filings</m> or
<m>pins</m> in the <m>lead</m>, <del>but</del> in order to render it
hard. But this renders it brittle &amp;<del>not</del> it breaks under
the <tl>hammer</tl>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

Take a <tl>wirebrush</tl> to clean your <tl>molds</tl>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
