<root>
<page>122v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f250.item.r=</image>

<div>

<id>p122v_1</id>

<head>Cleaning the <tl>bowl</tl> and the <tl>spoon</tl> with which one
wets the sand</head>

<ab>Be careful to clean, as soon as &amp; quickly after you have cast,
your <tl>bowl</tl> &amp; your <tl>spatula</tl> or <tl>spoon</tl> with
which you wet your sand, because <del><fr>â€™il</fr></del> if it dries in
them, it crumbles &amp; falls into the fresh sand &amp; makes a hole or
a fault in the work. When also the <tl>mold</tl> is reheated, these
little pieces crust up &amp; flake off &amp; prevent neat
casting.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p122v_2</id>

<head>Molding hollow</head>

<ab><m>Wax</m> on its own cools too quickly &amp; does not run well
everywhere, &amp; <m>tallow</m> keeps well its heat &amp; runs
everywhere, but on its own it is not good. But when <m>wax</m> &amp;
<m>tallow</m> are mixed, the work is only better. <m>Crayfish</m> &amp;
other small animals can easily be molded hollow for the body, but as for
the legs, it will be troublesome.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The first part of the <tl>mold</tl>, that is the first cast on the
<tl><m>clay</m> slab</tl>, cracks more readily in the fire than the
second.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p122v_3</id>

<head>Molding medals and flat things</head>

<ab>You are not bound to making the gate for legs thus

<figure>

<id>fig_p122v_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5aTlRdkx2eVdtZXM</link>

</figure>

, but rather in this way

<figure>

<id>fig_p122v_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5WFBpaEV5Ti1hRUU</link>

</figure>

, which embraces the medal well. For the other way with legs is only
done to accommodate more delicate works and the other, <add>which is
wide and in one piece</add>, works better for flat medals. But take heed
that all gates be very thin close to the medal &amp; almost not as thick
as the medal, if it is not very thin like <m>paper</m>. And then, from
the medal towards the gate, thicken it as it goes, for it comes better
thus. If the gate is thick, at the entry to the medal, the work will
never come out well. Make that, <del><fr>desp</fr></del> from the middle
of the gate to the top it is moderately thick, &amp; from the same
middle to the bottom very thin. Do not forget to makes grooves at
<del><fr>au hau</fr></del> the top of the gate to prevent that the
<m>metal</m> runs furiously.</ab>

</div>
</root>
