<root>
<page>164v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f334.item</image>

<div>

<id>p164v_1</id>

<head><tl>Molds</tl></head>

<ab>

For those <del>which</del> in which one needs to burn something, and
which do not open before being reheated, one does not make any casts
before it is reheated. For large <tl>molds</tl> in which the gate is big
and ample, it is necessary that the gate be well notched &amp;
scratched, in order that the weight of the <m>metal</m> does not go with
much force. They make hardly any flashing if they are pressed. But before
pressing them, put between them and the <tl>press</tl> some <tl>pieces
of <m>thick &amp; <fr>moufl√©</fr> felt</m></tl>, which is hardly yet
crushed, for it fills the concavities &amp; keeps the <tl>mold</tl> from
cracking. The <tl>clamps</tl> should be placed before reheating or
drying it.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

When the <m>earth</m>, from which you make the <tl><m>earthen</m>
slab</tl> to arrange your animal, is too soft, the <tl>points</tl> that
you put in it come out easily &amp; come undone when you thrown in the
sand &amp; thus the <tl>mold</tl> spoils and the shape comes undone.
Therefore when you recognise that your <tl>slab</tl> is too tender &amp;
soft, spread on top some <m>hot ashes</m> &amp; blow with
<tl>bellows</tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p164v_2</id>

<head>Sable</head>

<ab>

If there is not enough good <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> or
<m><la>crocum</la></m>, it will easily crack in the fire. But if it is
mixed with it, as it should be, it withstands it. One recognizes it as
good when, being hot after the cast, it quickly imbibes <m>water</m>
when one quenches <corr>it in it</corr>, &amp; <del>rends</del> breaks
easily because the <m>alum</m> &amp; the <m><la>crocum</la></m> render
it spongy. Contrarily, bad sand, which is only of <m>plaster</m> &amp;
<m>brick</m>, &amp; little mixed with <m>alum</m>, breaks easily in the
fire &amp; hardens in <m>water</m>. Cast, if possible, all in one
go.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p164v_3</id>

<head><tl>Molds</tl></head>

<ab>

Even though you cast in <m>lead</m>, the <tl>molds</tl> want to be well
dried, especially when they are large, and one needs to redden them on
the outside &amp; keep them in continuous heat, until they no longer
<m>smoke</m> from inside. Do not place them to reheat at <tmp>different
moments, but continue once you have started</tmp>. And do not place them
to cool <env>in the cold</env>, <del>with</del> for they would crack,
but leave them to become lukewarm near the fire, &amp; when they are
when they are still of such a heat as you have noticed before putting
your <tl><bp>finger</bp></tl> in the hole, cast. And when the
<tl>mold</tl> is large, it needs more time to reheat &amp; dry &amp; one
needs to cast hotter.</ab>

</div>
</root>
