<root>
<page>099v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f204.image</image>

<div>
<id>p099v_1</id>
<head><pa>Quince trees</pa></head>

<ab>They want to be pruned often, otherwise they die &amp; do not bear
fruit so beautifully.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p099v_2</id>
<head>Cannons</head>

<ab>They are very difficult to <tl>bore</tl> when they are of
<m>metal</m> because the substance is brittle &amp; frangible. But one
<del><fr>z</fr></del> ought not to push the <tl>borer</tl> with too
great a force nor continue all in one push, but pull it out often. In
that case, one makes the <del>touch-hole</del> <add>muzzle of the
cannon</add> bigger than the ball in order to avoid the necessity of
<tl>boring</tl>, because the substance is cast &amp; expands &amp;
pushes the mold. The <tl>borer</tl> should be neither like a swallow
tail, nor a point, but should cut in the round like a <tl>wimble</tl>.<comment>c_168r_01</comment>
If it breaks, one ought not to leave it there to rust
<mark>+</mark></ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
<mark>+</mark> but immediately take it out of the touch-hole. This
you will do by pouring a little <m>oil</m> on it; then
<del><fr>l</fr></del> turn the place of the touch-hole downwards &amp;
strike the opposite side of the piece, &amp; it will fall down. One
needs to <tl>bore</tl> gently &amp; at ease when the piece is of
<m>metal</m>.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p099v_3</id>
<head>Bells</head>

<ab>One does not make them in the pit if they do not fit.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p099v_4</id>
<head>Gilding <del>your</del> molding for panels without
<m>gold</m></head>

<ab>Some take <m>orpiment in leaf form</m> &amp; pulverize it &amp; make
<fr>moresque</fr> leaves &amp; burnish it, and it is this
<m>orpiment</m> which is shiny like <m>gold</m>. However, <m>ground
metals</m> or <m>ground <fr>cristallin</fr></m> or <m>touchstone</m> are
better.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p099v_5</id>
<head><m>Orpiment</m> orange</head>

<ab>One sublimates it &amp; one grinds it &amp; some put in a little
<m>arsenic</m> to make it melt instead.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p099v_6</id>
<head><m>Varnish</m></head>

<ab>Some make this of <m>mastic</m> with two <ms>ounces</ms> of
<m>mastic</m> and one of <m>clear &amp; white turpentine oil</m> &amp;
<m>eau-de-vie</m> as above. Heat it on <m>ashes</m> until it is melted,
then let it rest &amp; put it in another <tl>vessel</tl> to purge it of
dregs.</ab>

</div>
</root>
