<root>
<page>127r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f259.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p126v_3</id>

<ab>some thread, as much to secure the plants, in order that they do not
rise <del><fr>par</fr></del> when you throw in your clear sand, as to
give them air when the <tl>mold</tl> is reheated. For, in doing this,
the <del><tl>mold</tl></del> <add>thread</add> burns &amp; leaves some
empty space around the plants, which serves as vents, &amp; places for
evacuating, &amp; to give air to the plants so that they burn better.
For what makes them stay as <m>charcoal</m> is that they burn in a
closed fire &amp; without empty space because of their fine sprigs. Try,
therefore, to thicken the main stem with a little <m>melted wax</m>
&amp; let it cool, then mold it. And when the <m>wax</m> melts, it airs
it, the principal stem, with space &amp; as if loose, so that it burns
better. Or else, anoint them with <m>oil of <fr>petrol</fr> or
sulfur</m>, <add><fr>de</fr></add> <m>turpentine</m>, <m>oil of
brick</m>, &amp; similar things, or <m>aquafortis</m> or
<m>eau-de-vie</m>, or make sands with <m><la>crocum</la></m>, <m>iron
scales</m>, loops of <m>iron</m>, <m>emery</m>, &amp; things that
withstand several <ms><tmp>days</tmp></ms> of great firing.</ab>

<ab><m>Animal bones</m> are not so difficult to burn &amp; reduce to
<m>ashes</m>, because the <m>flesh</m>, once burned, the <m>bones</m>
remain loose &amp; the weight of the <m>quicksilver</m> makes them break
&amp; disintegrate, once calcined &amp; burnt.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
<pa>Asparagus</pa> always stays as <m>charcoal</m>, like little pins.
Try to take it, and <pa>thyme</pa>, at the beginning, when they are
growing, so that their stem is still thin.</ab>

</div>
<div>
<id>p127r_1</id>
<head><tl>Molds of <m>plaster</m></tl> for <m>wax</m></head>

<ab>When your <tl>mold of <m>plaster</m></tl> is done &amp; dried, take
heed that your <tl>mold</tl> be of good release, for sometimes it
happens that the animal, being wounded or thin &amp; withered, makes
wrinkles, where <del><fr>retire</fr></del> there being some scales, that
is where the <m>plaster</m> enters. And this not being of good release,
the <m>wax</m> animal attaches itself &amp; breaks &amp; you would never
have it perfect. <rub>Take heed</rub> also to make your gates for the
<m>wax</m> very wide. Thus &amp; that the gates are not too thick.
They are made when <del>the animal is</del><figure>

<id>fig_p127r_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5ZFFkT3I4Vmx2em8</link>

</figure> the <tl>mold</tl> with both sides is made &amp; the animal is
outside of it.</ab>

</div>
</root>
