<root>
<page>021r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f47.image</image>

<div>

<id>p021r_1</id>

<head><pro>Gunner</pro></head>

<ab>As for small cannons which are not loaded with a <tl>ladle</tl>,
one charges them with <m>powder</m> up to the escutcheon,<comment>c_018v_02</comment> which
is placed on the piece with due proportion.</ab>

<ab>To point a cannon, that is to say to take its aim, one needs to take
the sight, that is to say aim, from the sides before the top, that is to
say above the cannon. For by aiming along the top, you will be better
able to find the line tending to your target, but you would not find out
if the cannon tends more to one side than the other. Therefore take your
sight on one side, then on the other &amp; adjust your piece to the
point at which you aim. Then take your sight from the top of the breech,
which will soon be done. Next, lower your piece a little at your
discretion if you are within true range, because the force of the
<m>powder</m> usually makes it rise. But if you were farther away than
your piece shoots at point blank, you would need to consider that the
weight of the ball would make it lower.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p021r_2</id>

<head>For firing a cannon at night</head>

<ab>Some keep their pieces loaded <del>and</del> from the day. Then, in
order that the <pro>gunner</pro> can fire into the breach where the
assailed are perhaps making repairs, the besiegers raise a false alarm
in order that the besieged throw <m>torches</m> &amp; <m>artificial
fire</m> into the moats or around the breach, at which the
<pro>gunner</pro> aims. Sometimes, by using the reflection of
<tl>mirrors</tl> or <tl>flasks</tl> full of <m>water</m>, the assailants
light up the breach. The method you know, with a <tl>quadrant</tl> &amp;
<tl><m>plumb</m> line</tl>, is very good. Others nail two or three rows
of boards with <m>strong iron pegs</m> on the <m>wooden</m> platform
made for mounting the cannon, and leave empty notches into which the
wheels of the cannon can just fit. And by such means you will always
<del><fr>te</fr></del> place it at a similar <del><fr>q</fr></del>
point, that it will not incline more to the right than to the left. And
in order that it be neither too high nor too low, when you fire during
the day, you place a <tl>ruler</tl> fixed well in the ground, which
comes just to touch the the bottom of the edge of the cannon after it
has been pointed &amp; adjusted for firing.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>If the
platform<comment>c_021r_01</comment>, the wheels, or the
wedges<comment>c_021r_01</comment> break or are disturbed, this
invention is of no profit.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
