<root>
<page>093v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f192.image</image>

<div>
<id>p093v_1</id>
<head>Faces in <m>distemper</m></head>

<ab>Because colors in <m>distemper</m> dry promptly &amp; one would not
have leisure to perfect the shadows &amp; touches on the face, one wets
the reverse of the face which is on <m>canvas</m> with a wet
<tl>sponge</tl>. Then, with a small <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>, one makes
the shadows, which do not come undone. Next, one lays the flesh color,
which does not prevent the already painted shadows from appearing. And
again with a more lively flesh color, one touches the more prominent
areas. And with another <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> one does the shadows
<add>again</add> by hatching. The shadow strokes do not come undone
because they are made of <m>bistre</m>, which stains the <m>canvas</m>
like <m>rust</m>. The said <m>bistre</m> is good <del>with</del> for
making shadows in <m>distemper</m> <del>mix</del>, for in <m>oil</m> it
has no body &amp; would not dry but with great difficulty. One mixes in
the said <m>bistre</m>, for shadow, <m><fr>ocre de ru</fr></m> &amp; a
little <m>sap green</m>. The best <m>bistre</m> is the greasy &amp;
shiny kind from the <env>fireplaces of large kitchens</env>. It is
difficult to grind &amp; screeches on the <tl><m>marble</m></tl>.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093v_2</id>
<head><m>Azure</m></head>

<ab><m><fr>Azur dâ€™esmail</fr></m> always wants to be cleaned because the
filth that can be seen in the <fr>laveures</fr> makes it die. One needs
to coat it two times, &amp; the first very thick, moving the
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> by laying it first lengthwise then across.
<figure/> It is better used on <m>canvas</m>, where it is imbibed
immediately, than on <m>wood</m>. <m>Varnish</m> returns it to its
vigor, because being imbibed, it becomes dark. To try it,
<pro>painters</pro> bring their <tl>palette</tl> to the
<pro>grocers</pro>, &amp; distemper &amp; alloy it with a little white
ground in <m>oil</m>, for in this way, the beautiful shows its
<fr>turquine</fr> vivacity, but the bad is lavender grey. The most
delicate is the best for working. It is thinned <del>working</del> by
washing it.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093v_3</id>
<head>Violet and <m>lake</m></head>

<ab>It is made of <m>azure</m> &amp; <m>lake</m> which is also assayed
on the <tl>palette</tl> with white. It is deemed beautiful that which
which, on a <m>polished knife</m> or on <tl><m>glass</m></tl> gives a
clear <del>red</del> color of red rose, tending a little towards violet.
The kind which is <del>blac</del> dark red is not as pleasant.</ab>

</div>
</root>
