<root>
<page>019v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f44.image</image>

<div>

<id>p019v_1</id>

<head>

Mathematical figures without <tl>ruler</tl> or <tl>compass</tl></head>

<ab>

You know how to draw a circle correctly with the <tl>quill</tl> &amp; or
else with the <tl><bp>nail of your right thumb</bp></tl> &amp; the bent
<tl><bp>big finger</bp></tl>. If you do not have a <tl>ruler</tl>, fold
<m>paper</m> in two five or six times to use it. And if you want to draw
a column, arch, oval, escutcheon correctly without a <tl>compass</tl>,
fold your <m>paper</m> such that the fold <del><fr>e</fr></del> gives
you a straight line, at the <ms>required distance</ms> from which, trace
a point <del>&amp; a</del> or a line &amp; saturate it well with
<m>ink</m>. Then fold again the <m>paper</m> &amp; rub it on the back
&amp; it will stamp however much you have made. In that way <del><fr>la
l</fr></del>, A is the line without <m>ink</m> which the <m>paper</m>
fold gives you, B is the line you have traced, C is the one which is
stamped.

<figure>

<id>fig_p019v_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5SUUzLXQ4UVlGR1U</link>

<!--Philip Cherian: Figure under text of block, placed after In this
way-->

</figure>

<figure>

<id>fig_p019v_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5cy0tdXF5MGJTLU0</link>

</figure>

<figure>

<id>fig_p019v_3</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5R0VMdFQ3VC1lQmM</link>

</figure>

<figure>

<id>fig_p019v_4</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5TGJOZGVvTmV1LW8</link>

</figure>

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p019v_2</id>

<head><corr><del><fr>P</fr></del></corr>For writing as well from the
left as from the right</head>

<ab>

Write as best you can with <m>well-gummed ink</m> on as many little
<m>cards</m> as you want <del><ill/></del> to write words. &amp; once
each letter is well saturated with <m>ink</m>, put it down on your
<m>paper</m> &amp; rub with a <tl>tooth</tl> the back of the
<m>card</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p019v_3</id>

<head>Enemas</head><comment>c_019v_01</comment>

<ab>

One used to give them with <tl><m>leather</m> sleeves or bags</tl>,
which for the best result <del>is</del> must be of <m><al>cat</al>
skin</m> which is more mitten-like than any other. And then one would
start to fold back the <tl>sleeve</tl> on one side &amp; one would
continue to fold it back &amp; twist it around itself &amp; in that way
the enema would run gently. But this manner takes longer &amp; is less
convenient than the <tl>syringe</tl> which has been discovered since,
with which a single man easily gives himself an enema. It is true that
it always causes wind at the end.</ab>

</div>
</root>
