<root>
<page>065r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f135.image</image>

<div>

<id>p065r_1</id>

<head>Shadows</head>

<ab> Because blacks make different colors, some a reddish black, others
tend towards blue, and others towards green, choose those which tend
towards yellow to make beautiful shadows in <m>oil</m>, for shadow,
especially that of men, is yellowish. And for this effect use very
strongly ground <m>jet</m>, which you will mix with a little
<m><add>yellow</add> ochre</m> &amp; <m>lead white</m>. Or else, after
you have ground your <m>lead white</m> <del><fr>bro</fr></del> and
<del>clean <fr>p</fr></del> gathered it with the <figure>

<id>fig_p065r_1</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5UFZyOUNKU3pqVXc</link>

</figure>, grind the <m>jet</m> into it. Thus it will be more
desiccative, &amp; making on its own a yellowish black. A little white
mixed in renders it perfect for men's shadows. Blacks which make a
greenish black are appropriate for women's shadows. Take, then, some
black of <gap/>, a little <m>sap-green</m> &amp; <m>bistre</m>, &amp;
you will have a perfect shadow for women in <m>distemper</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-top</margin>

The powder of <m><pa><fr>orber√©</fr>grain</pa></m> is darker than
<m>umber</m> &amp; when you lack <m>umber</m>, the said powder will do,
but it does not have body.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p065r_2</id>

<head>Flesh color</head>

<ab>You must know well the mixing of colors &amp; the appropriate
shadows, but above all make sure to soften them well. And note &amp;
observe that a thing which appears flat needs to be softened lengthwise,
as if going from <del><fr>l<exp>ett</exp>re a ga</fr></del> right to
left like

<figure>

<id>fig_p065r_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5eUhrRmdpaWNCZlk</link>

</figure>

, and whatever ought to appear round must be softened in circles.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p065r_3</id>

<head><tl>Mirror</tl></head>

<ab>When you make flesh colors, it is good to have a
<tl><m><fr>cristallin</fr></m> <tl>mirror</tl></tl>, which represents
well after nature, and in which <del>it</del> you will see if your
shadows are soft enough or too crude. But do not look at it with a
<tl>candle</tl>, for <env>firelight</env> will make the shadows reddish.
The <pro>painter</pro> also teacher himself with the <tl>mirror</tl>,
for he sees in it what the natural can do.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p065r_4</id>

<head>Greasy colors</head>

<ab>If some part remains shiny and does not seem dry after the layered
colors have penetrated, it means that this part is greasy, &amp; that
the second colors one layers on would not take on the dry layer, unless
you rub this part with <m>soap</m> or breathe on it, because the
humidity will make the colors take.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

One cannot layer <m>oil</m> on cut <m>paper</m> &amp; model as in
<m>distemper</m> because the colour would run. Thus, to <m>gild</m> with
<m><fr>or mat</fr></m>, one needs to pounce &amp; then layer the <m>gold
color</m> with the <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

All greasy colors, such as <m>ceruse</m> and <m>minium</m>,
<m>massicot</m>, <m>ochre</m>, <m>lead white</m> are good for making
gold color.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

Any color or thing that thickens when <m>water</m> is put with it when
it is being ground has body. But those that lack it, such as
<m><tl>pestled</tl>glass</m>, <m>lake</m> &amp; become clear.</ab>

</div>
</root>
