<root>
<page>017v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f40.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p017r_1</id>

<ab>The large cannon, which is for great
batteries<comment>c_017v_01</comment>, usually weighs fifty-five or lx
<ms>quintals</ms>. At the breech it carries the <ms>thickness of
<del><fr>b</fr></del> two balls &amp;<del><fr>l</fr></del> three parts
of one ball <add>the one</add></ms>. At the front, it carries
<del><fr>ba</fr></del> the <ms>thickness of one ball &amp;
<del>two</del> three parts the two</ms>. It is thirteen or fourteen
<ms><fr>pans</fr></ms>long. But they are very troublesome to drive. The
head-on battery, to accomplish its task quickly <del>is</del> &amp;
batter with great force, is at <del><fr>d</fr></del> one-hundred fifty
<ms>paces</ms> &amp; at two hundred. <del>And</del> It is true that one
batters well from three or 4 hundred <ms>paces</ms>, but it is necessary
to give it more <m>powder</m>. Its common load is <del><fr>p</fr></del>
of xx <ms>lb</ms> of <m>powder</m>, its ball of 40 <ms>lb</ms>. One
needs xxv <al>horses</al> to draw it. When one fires it farther than its
usual range, one puts in a <ms>half <tl>ladle</tl></ms> of <m>cannon
powder</m> more. A cannon can fire
4^(xx)<comment>c_017v_02</comment> or a hundred shots <ms>per
<tmp>day</tmp></ms>, but one needs to refresh it every time after one
has fired <del>te</del> nine or ten shots, if the battery is steadily
used. For if there is a break, it is not necessary to refresh it as
often. For two <ms>quintals</ms> of <m>copper</m>, or two <ms>quintals
&amp; a half</ms> if it is for large cannons, one puts one
<ms>quintal</ms> of <m>metal</m> <add><mark>#</mark></add>. The
<m>metal</m> is composed at the beginning of eight <ms>lb</ms> of
<m>tin</m> for one <ms>quintal</ms> of <m><fr>rosette</fr></m>, while
for large bells one only puts six <ms>lb</ms> of <m>fine tin</m> for one
<ms>quintal</ms> of <m><fr>rosette</fr></m>, to give it a <sn>bigger
voice</sn>. For the more <m>tin</m> there is, the clearer the
<sn>sound</sn> is. <del>Its</del> For gun founding, if one provides the
material &amp; <m>charcoal</m>, as one usually does, for
<pro>masters</pro> do not have the means, one gives x to xii
<ms><cn>lb</cn> per quintal</ms>. And <del>for the mat</del> when the
<pro>master</pro> provides everything, one gives him 40 <ms><cn>lb</cn>,
<add>according to the <pro><pn>King</pn></pro>'s ordinance</add>, per
quintal</ms> for large pieces <del>&amp;</del> such as cannons, and for
small pieces, L <ms><cn>lb</cn></ms> . For the more material there is,
the more profit the <pro>master</pro> has of it. One founds another kind
of cannon-perriers of xxx <ms>quintals</ms> which are longer than the
others, and easily eight <ms><fr>pans</fr></ms> long, &amp; they are for
battering defenses &amp; <env>casemates</env> <del><fr>s</fr></del>,
placing them via <env>trenches</env> on the <env>edge of the ditch</env>
<tmp>by night</tmp>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<mark>â—¯</mark>

On each side of the opening of the breech they give the <ms>thickness of
half a ball</ms>. And then they also add on each side the <ms>third part
of a ball</ms>.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

<del><fr>Ain</fr></del> one gives it two <tl><ms>ladles</ms></tl> of
<m>cannon powder</m> for its charge, &amp; <ms>one &amp; a half of</ms>
<m>arquebus powder</m>, &amp; the same for the others.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<mark>#</mark>

The composition of <pl>French</pl> cannons is of <ms>one quintal of
<m>metal</m> for two of <m><fr>rosette</fr></m></ms>.
But<comment>c_017v_03</comment> those of <pl>Toulouse</pl> &amp;
<pn>Poncet</pn> puts iii of <m><fr>rosette</fr></m> &amp; one of
<m>metal</m>.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

The <m><fr>rosette</fr></m> for re-melting is more profitable than
<tl>cauldrons</tl>, which turn entirely into <m>filth</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

Old pieces are composed of almost <del><fr>de dem</fr></del> <ms>as much
of one as of the other</ms>, namely one <ms>part</ms> of
<m><fr>rosette</fr></m> &amp; one of <m>metal</m>. One recognises this
composition with a <tl>burin</tl>. For its substance is found to be sour
&amp; the particle taken from the <tl>burin</tl> is found to be mixed
with yellow &amp; white.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
