<root>
<page>115r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f235.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p114r_1</id>
<margin>left-top</margin>

<ab>
<figure/>if you want, which will be enough, or else on the two halves.
But because one needs to cast by the tail or from the back of the
animal, make it so that the vents come from the head &amp; the middle of
the body to respond to the tail, where the cast is done, which is the
end of the mandore. And having done your cast, do not forget to make in
it some holes and notches because the metal will run more neatly, as if
the cast was even, for it gets corrupted in its notches &amp; holes,
&amp;does not go so much at once, &amp; does not become as porous. This
done, join the two halves of your mold &amp; strengthen the joints,
putting around these some small <tl>clamps</tl> of iron wire of this shape. They
prevent the molds from deforming &amp; corrupting while reheating.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p115r_1</id>
<head><del>Make the cast, reheat the <tl>molds</tl>, &amp;c</del>Note
about everything above<mark>|-|</mark></head>

<ab>If your <al>snake</al> has been without eating for a long time, it
happens that, when you want to kill it in <m><bp>urine</bp></m> &amp;
<m>vinegar</m>, it fills with a lot of <m>water</m> &amp; swells, and
next it dries out as you fix &amp; arrange it on the <m>clay</m>
<fr>tourtelle</fr>, and next it happens that when you have cast your
<del><tl><fr>moule</fr></tl></del> wet sand on it, &amp; it has set, it
ends up coming out such that between the <al>snake</al> and animal there
is a <ms>line</ms> of distance <del><fr>D</fr></del>, in which enters
the second batch of cast wet sand <del><fr>M</fr></del>. Avoid this
therefore if you can. But if this cannot be, do not let this prevent
your second cast, for the sand which will enter in this void, will be so
weak that it will easily be removed with a <tl>small point</tl>, &amp;
will not have set with the first hardened one.</ab>

<ab>Note that one needs more <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> for
<tl>molds</tl> which should be reheated, like those for <m>gold</m>
&amp; <m>silver</m>, &amp; things that one needs to burn inside, than
those which release well, &amp; and that are only for casting
<m>lead</m> &amp; <m>tin</m>. However do not put too much in one or the
other. </ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p115r_2</id>
<head>Animal after release</head>

<ab>If, by chance, you gave your <al>snake</al> such a writhing shape,
such that the place of the belly cannot easily come out, especially
since the head &amp; the tail, which are the two ends, are
<corr>thinner</corr>, cut everything which is outside, &amp; reheat the
<tl>mold</tl> so well that what remained inside burns, then pass some
<m>quicksilver</m> inside &amp; attracting <del><fr>ce qui</fr></del>
the <m>ashes</m> &amp; the <m>burnt bones</m> from the inside, it will
also come out, because the conduit is big, &amp; thus will not sour at
all your substance. You can pull really strongly the molded
<al>snake</al>, because it is soft &amp; malleable &amp; obedient &amp;
the <tl>mold</tl>, having set, is so firm that because of this the
imprint will not be spoiled at all. </ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p115r_3</id>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5aS1ZeHc2dGxJTE0</link>

</figure>

</div>

<div>
<id>p115r_3</id>
<head>Reheating <tl>molds</tl></head>

<ab>After your <tl>molds</tl> have been reheated <del><fr>le</fr></del>
&amp; cleaned, the sooner casted is best, because if you keep them, they
get corrupted and dampened. Reheat the thickest, where the body of the
animal is, cast as soon as possible, because if you keep your
<tl>molds</tl> it will corrode and become damp. Reheat the thickest
part, where the body of the animal is, at the top, so that, if there is
something inside to burn, it falls to the bottom.</ab>

<ab>Mark the part on top to recognize it</ab>

<ab>It is only a good thing to leave the <tl>mold</tl> die down a little
outside <del><fr>pource</fr></del>, once well reheated, because it
remains red on the inside when you will cast.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p115r_4</id>

<margin>left-bottom</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5Xzg4WTZ2NFNkOHM</link>

<caption>This is the shape of the <tl>clamps</tl></caption>

</figure>

</div>
</root>
