<root>
<page>050r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f105.image</image>

<div>

<id>p050r_1</id>

<head>Keeping fruit <tmp>for the entire year</tmp></head>

<ab>Take a <tl><m>glass</m> ampul</tl> with an opening capable of
receiving <pa>cherries</pa> and <pa>plums</pa> or whatever fruit that
you want. Put in some <m>hot water</m><tmp>for the space of two
hours</tmp>. And when your <m>water</m> will be cooled, throw it &amp;
turn the opening upside down on a <tl>quite even <del>&amp;</del>
table</tl>, &amp; <env>in a room where there is not a bit of air &amp;
of wind</env>. Then <del><fr>en</fr></del> prepare a stopper of <m>new
wax</m>, wrapped in <m>waxed canvas</m>, and adjust it to the
<tl>ampul</tl> quite precisely in order that it will be all ready to
stop it when you will have put in the fruit. And when you will have
delicately picked with your <bp>hand</bp> only the <m>fruit</m> that is
not rotten &amp; <tmp>on a warm &amp; dry day</tmp>, return to the
<env>well-closed room, where neither wind nor draft may enter</env>,
&amp; put it gently &amp; with dexterity in the <tl>bottle</tl>. Then
stop the <tl>bottle</tl> well with the <tl>stopper</tl> &amp; lute it
&amp; making the lute if it seems good with some <m>quicklime</m> &amp;
<m>oil</m>, &amp; such that no <m>water</m> may enter in. Then put your
<tl>bottles</tl> in a <tl>vat full of <m>water</m></tl>, <tmp>during the
summer</tmp> <del><fr>Et lhiver pourceque la cave s</fr></del>, <env>in
a cellar</env>, and <tmp>in the winter</tmp> put your <tl>bottles</tl>
into a <tl>basket</tl> furnished with some <tl>weights</tl> &amp; lower
it to the bottom of a <env>deep well</env>. For <tmp>in the winter</tmp>
the <m>water of the vat</m> would be too cold if the <env>cellar</env>
is not quite warm, for one needs the <m>water</m> to be like <m>river
water</m>.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p050r_2</id>

<head>Molding</head>

<ab>If you want to promptly mold something in <fr>demy relief</fr> that
comes to hand, fold some <tl><m>paper</m></tl> in five or six doubles,
&amp; place it on the <tl>medal</tl> &amp; make sure the
<tl><m>paper</m></tl> is folded on the back of the <tl>medal</tl> so
that it is well secured. Next, take a <tl>stick</tl>, broad at one end
&amp; pointed at the other, well softened and rub well on the
<tl><m>paper</m></tl>, &amp;with the point of the <tl>stick</tl> retrace
the lines &amp; proceed until you recognize that your imprint is well
done. Then, at your convenience, slightly rub <m>oil</m> with a
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> <del><fr>lemp</fr></del> on the
<tl><m>>paper</m></tl> imprint and cast in <m>tallow</m> or
<m>wax</m> or <m>sulphur</m>, &amp; the <tl><m>paper</m></tl>, without
it burning, will render your portrait neat, which you will afterwards be able to
mold in <m>plaster</m> or <m>tripoli</m>, and then in
<m>lead</m> &amp; other <m>metal</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

Polished <tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl> of little thickness &amp; a little
moistened is proper. Then if you want, strengthen it with
<tl><m><fr>papier coll√©</fr></m></tl> on the back.</ab></div>
</root>
