<root>
<page>093r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f191.image</image>

<div>
<id>p093r_1</id>
<head><pa>Olives</pa></head>

<ab>They are spoiled if <ms><tmp>once per month</tmp></ms> one does not
refresh their <m>salt water</m>, and one ought not to <sn>touch</sn>
with their <bp>hands</bp>, for this makes them spoils.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093r_2</id>
<head>Observation from <pro>rustics</pro></head>

<ab>That when it <env>freezes</env> on <tmp>Palm Sunday</tmp>, it
<env>freezes</env> <tmp>all the months of the year</tmp></ab>

<ab>That when the first flowers fall <del><fr>les suiv</fr></del> &amp;
are lost from the <env>frost</env>, the others are usually lost
also.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093r_3</id>
<head>Grafts</head>

<ab>It is necessary that the graft not be from old wood for it is never
a beautiful tree.</ab>

<ab>One needs to leave only two shoots at maximum on the graft, for when
it has more, its strength is weakened. The wind torments it, &amp; it
does not have enough strength to bud.</ab>

<ab>Trees which have coarse marrow, like <pa>peach trees</pa> &amp; all
their kind &amp;the <pa>plum trees</pa>, do not want grafts <env>in
freezing weather</env> because the cold damages their marrow, which one
also needs to protect from wounding by cutting the foot of the
graft.</ab>

<ab>All grafts must not be made earlier than their tree will be sapping,
for the <md>humor</md> grows them quickly. Otherwise
<del><fr>au</fr></del>, they dry too quickly that the <md>humor</md> of
the sap does not grow them.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093r_4</id>
<head>Sand</head>

<ab>The <m>white ash of all woods</m>, which still sticks to the
<m>wood</m> that burns, and which has not fallen into the
<del><fr>bo</fr></del> <env><tl>hearth</tl></env>, molds very
neatly.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p093r_5</id>
<head>Sand</head>

<ab> <del><m>Ashes</m></del> <m>well pulverized tallow</m> molds &amp;
releases very neatly. The one from the <env>kitchens</env>, which is fat
&amp; shiny, from the <env>big kitchens</env>, is better.</ab>

<ab><m>Finely pulverized quicklime</m> works. The same for broken up
<m>flint</m>,which works better in the cavity.</ab>

</div>
</root>
