<root>
<page>154v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f314.image</image>

<div>

<id>p154v_1</id>

<head><m>Latten</m></head>

<ab>It is very capricious to cast. It must be cast very hot. And to rule
over it better, throw on it some <m>sal ammoniac</m> to thin it. Alloy
it as well with a little <m>red copper</m>, and when you want to cast, a
little <m>tin</m> to make it runnier. It always leaves a tail like
<m>melted glass</m>. It does not require as long a gate as
others.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p154v_2</id>

<head>Molding</head>

<ab>It is only good that it die down a little on the outside, &amp;
nevertheless be red on the inside, for when it comes out of the fire,
the air &amp; strong exhalations of heat do not receive the cast so
well.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p154v_3</id>

<head>The casting <add>of <m>silver</m></add></head>

<ab><m>Silver</m> needs a longish gate. For <m>gold</m> it does not
matter. <add><m>Silver</m>, when soldering, tolerates the <m>water</m>
one throws on it. But <m>gold</m> would spatter, &amp; <del>needs
that</del> for that reason one casts <del><m>solder</m></del>
<m>bran</m> on the <m>solder</m></add>.</ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

Let the <tl>mold</tl> cool well after the casting before opening
it.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p154v_4</id>

<head>Reinforcing flowers and delicate things</head>

<ab>For flowers <corr><del>&amp;</del></corr> <del>delicate things</del>
&amp; herbage, one does not use <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m> but <m>melted
butter</m>, of which one gives a light coat
<add><mark>#</mark></add> on the back of the petals of the
<pa>rose</pa> flower &amp; the <pa>pansy</pa> &amp; other flowers that
need it. But one reinforces the little legs of <al>flies</al> &amp;
other small animals with <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m> to strengthen them
&amp; make them hold up.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

with a <tl>small <fr>pinceau</fr></tl>

</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p154v_5</id>

<head><pa>Strawberries</pa></head>

<ab>The leaves are cast separately &amp; then are joined with
<m>solder</m>. And because the <pa>strawberry</pa> fruit is cast solid,
&amp; by that means is heavy, and the <m>tin</m> stem which is delicate
will not be able to hold it up without soon breaking, one makes the
stems with <m>latten wire</m> &amp; then one <m>solders</m> &amp; joins
them.</ab>

</div>
</root>
