<root>
<page>071r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f147.image</image>

<div>

<id>p071r_1</id>

<head><m>Amber</m></head>

<ab>It softens like <m>paste</m> when boiled in melted <m>wax</m>, and
takes color boiled with <m>fat of a young <al>goat</al></m>, for that of
a <al>goat</al> would make it break, principally if it is glazed.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p071r_2</id>

<head><m><fr>Bois madre</fr></m></head>

<ab>The <m><pa>elm</pa></m>, in its knotty root, has beautiful streaks
diversified with grey and black, and the <m>root of the
<pa>maple</pa></m>, but one needs to chose well the grain of the
<m>wood</m>. One gives the <m><pa>maple</pa></m> a certain yellow color,
then one varnishes it.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p071r_3</id>

<head>Mulled and sugared <m>wine</m></head>

<ab>

When the <pl>English</pl> have a cold, they mull <m>wine</m> in this
manner. They heat it in a <del>large</del> <tl><m>tin</m> pot</tl> until
it boils, and when it is boiling up, they <del>remove it from</del>
light it with <tl><m>burning paper</m></tl> <ms>to know if it is hot
enough</ms>. Next, to ignite it entirely, they pour it from one
<tl>vessel</tl> into another, as one who wants to beat <m><fr>eau
pan√©e</fr></m>, and as they are doing this, someone else lights with a
<m>burning paper</m> what is falling from one <tl>vessel</tl> into the
other, such that you would think you were pouring fire. When the
<m>wine</m> is mulled enough, heat it again a little, adding a few
<m>cloves</m> &amp; a <ms>sufficient quantity</ms> of <m>sugar</m>. And
they <del>dri</del> drink it as hot as they can to overcome a cold.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The common <pl>English</pl> put <m>sugar</m> in <m>wine</m> to imitate
for themselves the <m>sweet new wine</m> which they cannot have because,
owing to the <tmp>long sea crossing</tmp>, the <m>wine</m> has lost its
sweetness and is clarified before it reaches their country.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p071r_4</id>

<head>Weary <al>horses</al></head>

<ab>For fortifying a harried <al>horse</al>, they make it drink some of
the aforesaid <m>wine</m> through a <tl>horn</tl>, and it finds itself
disposed for doing an even greater labor.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p071r_5</id>

<head><m>Eau-de-vie</m></head>

<ab>The <pl>Irish</pl> do not drink any <m>wine</m> because they convert
it into <m>eau-de-vie</m>, which they use almost as habitually as we use
<m>wine</m>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
