<root>
<page>124r</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f253.item.r=</image>

<div>
<id>p124r_1</id>
<head>Animals with hair and fragile and very thin flowers</head>

<ab>Animals with hair are awkward to mold because the hairs raise up
&amp; come out looking mixed up &amp; <del><fr>to</fr></del> clumped
together. Starting, one ought to keep it flat with something dessicative
&amp; that makes it firmer. And in this, the most singular thing is
<m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m>, with which you will anoint it. Once cast, you
will be able to repair it. The bodies of <al>butterflies</al> and
plants, that have the stem &amp; the leaves that are wooly with some
hair, capricious &amp; downy, need also to be anointed with the same
<m>oil</m>, to keep these hairs laid down; likewise flowers that have
leaves very delicate &amp; thin, for dry <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m> makes
them rigid and firm. And if someone brags about molding what is
presented to them, give them to mold the downy head of the plant called
<pa><df>dandelion</df></pa> or a <pa>pappus</pa>, which comes from the
seeds of <pa>burdock</pa> &amp; flies away at the slightest sigh of
<env>wind</env>.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p124r_2</id>
<head><fr>Noyaulx</fr> for molding hollow</head>

<ab>Animals of <m>gold</m> &amp; <m>silver</m> can readily be molded
<del><fr>s</fr></del> hollow, to avoid weightiness, and costs as well,
if they are not very small. But to make the core &amp; the
<fr>noyau</fr>, one needs the <tl>mold</tl> to be freshly molded &amp;
not dry.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p124r_3</id>
<head><al>Spider</al>â€™s web</head>

<ab>It comes undone in <m>water</m> &amp; thus, cannot be molded in a
<fr>noyau</fr>, but one casts the <m>spider</m> and then one draws the
drawn threads between the grass that they make <env>in the fields</env>
on some <tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl> with a <tl>point</tl>. One makes
around an edge of <m>paper</m>, <tl><m>glued to the
<fr>carton</fr></m></tl> &amp; one casts with <m>tin, very little
alloyed with lead</m>.</ab>

</div>

<div>
<id>p124r_4</id>
<head><m>Fine gold</m> </head>

<ab>There is a species of <m>gold</m> which, even though it is very fine
&amp; unalloyed &amp; has been passed through <m>aquafortis</m> &amp;
<m>antimony</m>, is however so brittle that it hardly withstands the
<tl>hammer</tl>. And the composition of <m>verdet</m> described above to
make <m>gold</m> run, makes it as <fr>doux</fr> as
<m>lead</m>.</ab></div>
</root>
