<root>
<page>056v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b9059316c/f118.item</image>

<div>

<id>p056v_1</id>

<head>Painter</head>

<ab>The <m>lake</m> &amp; <del><m>floree</m></del> <m>rosette of
<pl>Ghent</pl></m> &amp; others lose their color &amp; die in the
air.</ab>

<ab>All <tl><m>marble</m></tl> on which a <tl>knife</tl> can prick is
worth nothing for grinding fine colors.</ab>

<ab><m>Chalk</m> has no body in <m>oil</m>. <m>Ceruse</m> is
appropriate. But <m>lead white</m> more excellent. <m>Ceruse</m> is the
whitest, when ground first in <m>water</m>, the <m>lead white</m>
grayish. But <del>the white</del> it takes on its perfect whiteness in
<m>oil</m>.</ab>

<ab>When you grind your colors, first clean your <env>workshop</env>
well, for when walking, if you stir up dust, this will damage your
colors, which will never be beautiful if they are not very
<del><fr>be</fr></del> clean.</ab>

<ab><m>Florey</m> must not be mixed with <m><fr>azur d'esmail</fr></m>
or another, for it makes it green.</ab>

<ab>For <tl>palettes</tl> to paint, <m>ivory</m> is excellent, <m>knots
of the <pa>fir tree</pa></m>, the <m><pa>pear tree</pa></m> &amp;, if it
is a <m><pa>walnut tree</pa></m>, make sure the grain of the <m>wood</m>
runs lengthwise.</ab>

<ab><del><fr>L</fr></del> One always needs to prime
<del><fr>d</fr></del> on <m>wood</m> to paint there in <m>oil</m> in
order to fill the holes &amp; unevenness, and prime with some <m>stil de
grain yellow</m> &amp; <m>ceruse</m> mixed in <m>oil</m>, then soften
with a <tl>feather</tl>, which flattens better than a
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>. Or when the primer is dry, scrape strongly
with a <tl>knife</tl>.</ab>

<ab>To use <m><fr>azur dâ€™esmail</fr></m> in <m>oil</m>, one needs to
choose the most delicate. And to make it subtle, one ought not grind it,
for this makes it whiten. But one needs to wash it, &amp; the coarsest
going to the bottom, choose the one that is at the top of the
<m>water</m> or, by inclination, pour out the cloudy <m>water</m>, then
gather the <m>azur</m>.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

@<pro>The one who <add>makes his profession</add> working in
<m>oil</m></pro> will hardly work well in <m>distemper</m> if he has not
been trained well from adolescence. For the way of working is different,
because when washing the <tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> for <m>distemper</m>,
one always leaves it moist. And on the contrary, when one cleans the
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> in <m>oil</m> to soften, one wipes the
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> well. Otherwise, the work would run &amp;
would soon be disfigured.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

The <pl>Italians</pl> soften by hatching with a large flattened
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl> which makes serrations.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

And they do not lay their shadow all at once like the <pl>Flemish</pl>,
but make them hatching lightest toward the light then a little darker
next &amp; and finally a little blacker to better make recede &amp; come
up.</ab>

<ab>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

In <m>distemper</m> do not mix your different colors together
<del>But</del> for this makes them die, but use each separately. And in
order that they do not dry &amp; that you have time to soften, moisten
the back of the <m>canvas</m>.</ab>

<cont/>

</div>
</root>
