<root>
<page>149v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f304.image</image>

<div>

<id>p149v_1</id>

<head>Molding vases in several pieces</head>

<ab><pro>Goldsmiths who work in wholesale and plate</pro> get whatever
<m>wooden</m> forms they please turned on a <tl>lathe</tl>. And then,
with some <m>wax</m>, they model on top masks, festoons, and whatever
they please. And next they mold in three, in four, or several
pieces.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p149v_2</id>

<head><m>Gold</m> <m>solder</m></head>

<ab>They take, on a <cn><m>gold</m> <fr>denier</fr></cn>, a
<ms><fr>grain</fr></ms> of the <m>fine <fr>alo√©</fr></m>, like <cn>old
<fr>douzains</fr></cn> are.</ab>

</div>

<div>

<id>p149v_3</id>

<head>Molding a <al>fly</al></head>

<ab><al>Large flies</al> can be molded &amp; <del><fr>g</fr></del> made
by casting. But one needs <del><fr>par d</fr></del> to anoint underneath
their wings with <m><pa>wheat</pa> oil</m>, which dries quickly and
fortifies them &amp; gives them a little thickness. The same is done to
<al>butterflies</al>, <al>cicadas</al>, <al>grasshoppers</al>, &amp;
similar things. But to cast them more easily, one applies them on some
leaf or bouquet. The others are <bp>made by hand</bp> with a <m>very
thin silver sheet</m>. <add>One ought not to keep them once dead,
because they dry out and their legs break.</add></ab>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

<m><pa>Wheat</pa> oil</m> is put underneath delicate things to render
them more rigid &amp; firm &amp; to make them hold their natural
position. Because being weak &amp; delicate, the wet sand, weighing down
their tops, would change their form.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p149v_4</id>

<head><al>Bat</al></head>

<ab>They have very thin wings, &amp; if they are large &amp; dry and
their wings extended, one would need a very large <tl>mold</tl> &amp; it
would not be certain that the <m>metal</m> would run sufficiently. Thus,
when you want to mold them, choose the medium-sized ones &amp; make the
pose <del>qu</del> so that they have their wings half folded. Because in
this way they will come out better, but support the side of the wings
with <m>wax</m>, as you know, to feed the cast well.</ab>

</div>
</root>
