<root>
<page>153v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f312.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p153r_2</id>

<ab><m>flour</m>. And to flatten it, take a <tl>small stick of
<m><pa>boxwood</pa></m></tl>, very round &amp; of the same thickness
everywhere, which has, at the two ends, a little circle, more raised
than the rest, to give the necessary thickness to the <m>paste</m>. And
then, with this <tl>rolling pin</tl>, flatten it in such a way that it
is <corr>delicate</corr> &amp; thin enough. Then, apply it on the hollow
of your <tl>mold</tl> and press on it with some <tl><m>cotton</m></tl>
&amp; your figure will imprint itself in the <m>paste</m>, in relief on
one side &amp; in hollow in the other. This done, anoint with a
<tl><fr>pinceau</fr></tl>, wetted in a little <m>melted butter</m>, the
part of the <m>paste</m> which is hollow. Then, cut the
<corr>excess</corr> <m>paste</m>, which surpasses the hollow of the
<tl>mold</tl> <del><fr>H</fr></del>. Anoint your <tl>mold</tl> also with
<m><pa>olive</pa> oil</m>, as you have done with others, place the
<tl><m>clay</m> contour</tl> &amp; cast <del><fr>s</fr></del> your
second mold. And you will have your medal as thin &amp; hollow on one
side as you want. You can have diverse <tl>rolling pins</tl>, which will
have ends, some more raised than others, to make diverse thicknesses, or
use <tl><m>sheets of lead &amp; copper</m></tl> of diverse thicknesses
or of <tl><m><fr>carton</fr></m></tl>, cut with the <tl>rolling
pin</tl>.</ab>

<figure>

<id>fig_p153v_1</id>

<margin>left-middle</margin>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5czR5TF9scDhsSG8</link>

</figure>

<ab><margin>left-middle</margin>

If you would rub your <m>paste</m> with <m>oil</m>, it would drink the
<m>oil</m> &amp; penetrate up to the <tl>mold</tl>, which it would
attack. But <m>butter</m> remains on the surface of the <m>paste</m>
&amp; is not imbibed at all. One ought not to, on these relief sides,
wet your sand with <m>hot water</m>, for it would melt the
<m>butter</m>.

<figure>

<id>fig_p153v_2</id>

<link>https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5c3FRZnZSMnU1Njg</link>

</figure>

</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p153v_1</id>

<head>Testing the goodness and strength of a sand to be reheated</head>

<ab>After it has set, it must be found smooth &amp; easy to cut, and not
rough. It tests better in a large &amp; fantastical <tl>mold</tl>, than
in a small one, for the large one remains long in the fire &amp; the
small one is soon reheated.</ab></div>

<div>

<id>p153v_2</id>

<head>Making <m>gold</m> <fr>doux</fr></head>

<ab>Sometimes, there is <m>gold</m> so dry <del>it</del> that neither
<m>cement</m> nor <m>antimony</m> can make it <fr>doux</fr>. Only
<m>verdet</m> can render it <fr>doux</fr>.</ab>

</div>
</root>
