<root>
<page>107v</page>

<image>http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f220.image</image>

<div>

<cont/>

<id>p107v_1</id>

<ab><tl>Molds</tl><comment>c_107v_08</comment> can only be used once for
fine things, like <pa>wormwood</pa> &amp; others, one needs to break
them, but before one needs to dip them well into <m>water</m> in which
the twice reheated things dissolve easily. Otherwise, you would not be
able <del><fr>f</fr></del> to release your work without danger of
spoiling it.</ab>

<ab><m><df>Good <fr>alum de
plume</fr></df></m><comment>c_107v_09</comment> is white and as lustrous
<add>as</add> <m>white <del><fr>c</fr></del> silk</m>. It is in pieces
long as a <ms><bp>finger</bp></ms>, &amp; is very breakable &amp; wooly
as <m>down</m>. The one made of <m>stone</m> is harder &amp; not so
good. <del><fr>Il</fr></del> The best of the above mentioned quality is
brought in <pl>France</pl> near <pl>Rouan</pl>. The <m><fr>alum de
plume</fr></m> for our sand is pestled in a <tl>mortar</tl>, and is
ground further on the <tl><m>marble</m></tl>, especially since one
cannot think of passing it finely through the <tl>sieve</tl>, for it is
so fat &amp; wooly, that it would not pass through it. It is this, with
its small soft <del><fr>qui</fr></del> &amp; thin filaments, which gives
binding to the sand, in a much more excellent fashion than
<m><fr>tondure</fr></m> in the <m>founderâ€™s earth of the <pro>founders
of great works</pro></m>, because this <m><fr>tondure</fr></m> &amp;
<m>cloth waste</m> burns and <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m> resists the
fire.</ab>

<ab>To enclose the <tl>molds</tl>, when you <del><fr>em</fr></del> throw
onto the things to mold your liquid sand, make <del>your</del> a circle
&amp; surround with well beaten <m>fat
earth</m><comment>c_107v_10</comment>.</ab>

<ab><la>Archanum omnibus fere reconditum est in re fusoria,<lb/>

v<exp>idelicet</exp> res exprimenda formis, sive <m>herba</m> sit sive
<m>animal</m><lb/>

ut <m>lucerta</m>, <del>in</del> <del>af</del> <del>inting</del>
inmergatur primum in <m>vini spiritum</m><lb/>

aprime rectificatum, deinde pulvere composito aspergatur<lb/>

sive illinatur (si pulvis in formam pultis redactus sit, ut<lb/>

assolet<sup>)</sup>.</la><comment>c_107v_11</comment></ab>

<ab>When you want to mold hollow, it is necessary that the
<fr>noyau</fr> be of the same substance. And if the <al>snake</al> or
the animal is curved or folded, one ought to make the <fr>noyau</fr> of
several pieces.</ab>

<ab><rub>Test whether <m>distilled vinegar</m></rub> is
appropriate for eating away &amp; dissolving what will be in the animal
molded hollow.</ab>

<ab>
<margin>left-middle</margin>
If you know that your <m>plaster</m> is not strong enough to withstand
the fire without cracking, do not be so scrupulous an observer of the
mixture put here that sometimes you <del><fr>mecties</fr></del> would
not diminish the quantity of <m><fr>alum de plume</fr></m>
<del><fr>l</fr></del><add>d</add> a little bit, for it softens the
<tl>molds</tl> with its sweetness. Once reheated do not pulverise it, on
this occasion, as fine as said, but leave it as the
<pro>apothecaries</pro> have ground it, for it does not hinder the
neatness of the cast &amp; gives more binding. When the <del>sand</del>
mold, <del><fr>estant</fr></del> having set, retains the color
<m>brick</m>, and is reddish, it is firmer.</ab>

</div>
</root>
